
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19): right to work checks
  

  
  
  
      
  Advice for employers carrying out right to work checks during the coronavirus pandemic.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office and Immigration Enforcement

      
      Published
      30 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        26 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Updated advice for employers carrying out right to work checks during coronavirus (COVID-19) adjusted measures

        
        
          Checking an individual’s right to work using the temporary COVID-19 adjusted check measures

        
        
          End of temporary adjustments

        
        
          Online right to work service

        
        
          Retrospective checks

        
        
          If the job applicant or existing worker cannot show their documents

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This update replaces previous guidance issued on 18 June 2021.

The end date for the temporary adjusted checks has now been deferred to 5 April 2022 (inclusive). We have made the decision to defer the date following the positive feedback we received about the ability to conduct checks remotely. We initiated a review of the availability of specialist technology to support a system of digital right to work checks in the future. The intention is to introduce a new digital solution to include many who are unable to use the Home Office online checking service, including UK and Irish citizens. This will enable checks to continue to be conducted remotely but with enhanced security.

Deferring the end date of the adjusted checks to 5 April 2022 ensures the Right to Work Scheme continues to operate in a manner which supports employers, whilst we look to implement a long-term, post-pandemic solution.

Updated advice for employers carrying out right to work checks during coronavirus (COVID-19) adjusted measures

The following temporary changes were made on 30 March 2020 and remain in place until 5 April 2022 (inclusive):


  checks can currently be carried out over video calls
  job applicants and existing workers can send scanned documents or a photo of documents for checks using email or a mobile app, rather than sending originals
  employers should use the Home Office Employer Checking Service if a prospective or existing employee cannot provide any of the accepted documents


Checks continue to be necessary and you must continue to check the prescribed documents set out in right to work checks: an employer’s guide or use the Home Office right to work online service. It remains an offence to knowingly employ anyone who does not have the right to work in the UK.

Checking an individual’s right to work using the temporary COVID-19 adjusted check measures

Up to and including 5 April 2022, if you are carrying out a temporary adjusted check, you must:


  ask the worker to submit a scanned copy or a photo of their original documents via email or using a mobile app
  arrange a video call with the worker – ask them to hold up the original documents to the camera and check them against the digital copy of the documents, record the date you made the check and mark it as “adjusted check undertaken on [insert date] due to COVID-19”
  if the worker has a current Biometric Residence Permit or Biometric Residence Card or has been granted status under the EU Settlement Scheme or the points-based immigration system you can use the online right to work checking service while doing a video call – the applicant must give you permission to view their details.



End of temporary adjustments

The temporary adjustments to right to work checks due to COVID-19 will end on 5 April 2022 (inclusive). New guidance will be issued ahead of 6 April 2022.


Online right to work service

The Home Office right to work online service gives you a defence against a civil penalty. You don’t need to see or check the individual’s documents, as right to work information is provided in real time directly from Home Office systems.

Employers cannot insist individuals use this service or discriminate against those who choose to use their documents to prove their right to work.

Retrospective checks

You do not need to carry out retrospective checks on those who had a COVID-19 adjusted check between 30 March 2020 and 5 April 2022 (inclusive). This reflects the length of time the adjusted checks have been in place and supports business during this difficult time.

You will maintain a defence against a civil penalty if the check you have undertaken during this period was done in the prescribed manner or as set out in the COVID-19 adjusted checks guidance.

It remains an offence to work illegally in the UK. Any individual identified who is disqualified from working by reason of their immigration status, may be liable to enforcement action.

If the job applicant or existing worker cannot show their documents

You must contact the Home Office Employer Checking Service. If the person has a right to work, the Employer Checking Service will send you a ‘Positive Verification Notice’. This provides you with a statutory excuse for 6 months from the date in the notice.




      
        
    Published 30 March 2020
    Last updated 26 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 August 2021
              Guidance updated to reflect extended end date of 5 April 2022.
            
            
              18 June 2021
              Updated as the end date for the temporary adjusted checking processes is now 31 August 2021.
            
            
              12 May 2021
              Updated as the end date for the temporary adjusted checking processes is now 21 June.
            
            
              20 April 2021
              Updated as the temporary adjustments introduced because of coronavirus end on 16 May 2021.
            
            
              30 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Right to work checks: an employer's guide
        Illegal working penalties: codes of practice for employers
        Right to work checklist
        Avoiding discrimination while preventing illegal working: code of practice, 2014

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Foreign nationals working in the UK
        International travel, immigration and repatriation during coronavirus
        Your responsibilities as an employer during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    