Healthcare consumer optimism in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), has improved since mid-June 2020 across most healthcare categories. However, more than a third of consumers have stated they are still willing to delay elective hospital visits for care due to concerns about COVID-19. Despite this, around 80 percent of consumers stated a high level of trust in the UAE system. Safety, cleanliness, and proximity remain the three critical factors listed by consumers when selecting healthcare providers during the crisis. At the same time, the strong shift towards digital health has been sustained with over a third of consumers using virtual care in the past two months, around 90 percent having a positive experience, and around 80 percent intending to continue using these services.These exhibits are based on survey data collected by McKinsey in the UAE in Q3 and Q4 2020.


		
	
 These materials are being provided on an accelerated basis in response to the COVID-19 crisis. These materials reflect general insight based on currently available information, which has not been independently verified and is inherently uncertain. Future results may differ materially from any statements of expectation, forecasts or projections. These materials are not a guarantee of results and cannot be relied upon. These materials do not constitute legal, medical, policy, or other regulated advice and do not contain all the information needed to determine a future course of action. Given the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, these materials are provided “as is” solely for information purposes without any representation or warranty, and all liability is expressly disclaimed. References to specific products or organizations are solely for illustration and do not constitute any endorsement or recommendation. The recipient remains solely responsible for all decisions, use of these materials, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, regulations, and standards. Consider seeking advice of legal and other relevant certified/licensed experts prior to taking any specific steps.