
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Cervical screening: call and recall administration best practice
  

  
  

  
    
  This document helps staff to run an efficient call and recall service for the NHS Cervical Screening Programme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      1 February 2004
      Last updated
      
        7 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Cervical screening: guidance for call and recall administration best practice
    
        
          Ref: PHE publications gateway number: GW-1058
        
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Cervical screening: programme governance
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Call and recall timetable
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Call and recall record retention schedule
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Colposcopy discharge notification template
    
        
          Ref: PHE publications gateway number: GW-1058
        
        ODT, 117KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
‘Call and recall’ is the process of inviting eligible people for cervical screening on a regular basis.

Administration and support staff should use this guidance to ensure the smooth and effective running of a local cervical screening call and recall service.


Contact the PHE Screening helpdesk with any queries about this publication, making sure you include its full title.




        
      

      
    Published 1 February 2004
    Last updated 7 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 June 2021
              Changed the number of days between reminder letters being sent and the setting of non-responder status from 94 to 98 days in the call and recall timetable.
            
            
              20 October 2020
              Content moved from pdf to html to improve accessibility.
            
            
              6 February 2020
              Updated guidance on cervical screening.
            
            
              10 April 2017
              Guidance updated April 2017.
            
            
              1 February 2004
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Abdominal aortic aneurysm screening: programme overview
        Cervical screening: professional guidance
        Cervical screening: programme and colposcopy management
        Bowel cancer screening: programme overview
        Breast screening programme: standards

  




      

    Collection

  


        Cervical screening: professional guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        NHS cervical screening (CSP) programme 

  


  

  


    
  


    