
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Living in Armenia
  

  
  
  
      
  Information for British national residing in Armenia, including advice on health, education, benefits, residence requirements and more. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      15 November 2013
      Last updated
      
        10 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Coronavirus

        
        
          Health

        
        
          Education

        
        
          Employment and recognised qualifications

        
        
          Entry and residence requirements

        
        
          Benefits

        
        
          Driving licences and vehicles

        
        
          Finance

        
        
          Guidance on bringing medication into Armenia

        
        
          Social ethics and traditions

        
        
          Returning to the UK

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

This guide sets out essential information for British national residing in Armenia, including advice on health, education, benefits, residence requirements and more. We are unable to provide any guidance on general lifestyle enquiries apart from the information and links listed below. 

Coronavirus

You should follow the advice of the Armenia’s government and your local authority. You can also read the Armenia travel advice for our latest guidance.

For information on vaccines abroad, see our COVID-19 travel guidance.

Health

Accessibility of the most essential services has become a very serious problem mainly for socially vulnerable groups in the population. Low purchasing power, absence of state medical insurance, the introduction of out-of-pocket payments and the increase in informal payments have resulted in sharp a decrease in timely referrals to doctors.

The practice of informal payments at health institution means that Armenians have to pay even for the few medical services that are officially free of charge. That includes prophylactic treatment of oncologic, cardiac, infectious and psychiatric diseases.  The informal payments typically range from 1,000 to 50,000 drams ($100).

All hospitals in Armenia are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Health. For services and drug policy.

Rules you should follow on ‘Law and Health’ and updates

GHIC information

Education

The system of education of the Republic of Armenia includes pre-school, general secondary, special secondary, vocational (professional-technical), higher and post-graduate education.

Pre-school education will be realized through a network of establishments of different kinds of ownership.  Secondary Education is compulsory and free of charge. There are both state and private institutions of higher education. As there is no law on education in Armenia the Ministry of Education is the sole body for issuing accreditation to the institutions.

Both free of charge (Governmental budget) and paid (private sources) higher education is available in Armenia.  Information for students planning to study in the country is regularly published on the web site of the Ministry of Education and Science

Information about separate Divisions and State Agencies:


  
    The Republic of Armenia Ultimate Qualification Commission Agency
  
  
    Licensing Agency
  
  
    State Inspectorate of Education
  
  
    State Scientific Committee
  


Find information about these institutions.

National Information Center for Academic Recognition and Mobility

Employment and recognised qualifications

British nationals who have a temporary residence permit shall be granted the right to work in the Republic of Armenia. Please find below the links to the relevant authorities for further information on permits and qualifications.

Residence permits are issued by Passport and Visa Department of the Police of Armenia.

Information on foreign credential assessment and recognition: description and procedures can be found at information on assessment and the recognition of foreign  qualifications.

Competent bodies

National Information Center for Academic Recognition and Mobility, the Armenian ENIC/NARIC

Entry and residence requirements

Foreigners enter the territory of the Republic of Armenian through border-control points. The citizens of the EU member-states and the Schengen Acquis states are exempted from the visa requirement. The citizens of mentioned countries are entitled to stay in Armenia without a visa up to 180 days per year.

British nationals do not require an entry visa to Armenia. They must have valid passport. Minor foreigners may enter Armenia accompanied by parents, a parent or any other legal representative. View entry requirements.

Residence permits are issued by Passport and Visa Department of the Police of Armenia to foreigners who have come to the Republic of Armenia on contractual basis or for private reasons; to the foreign students studying in the educational institutions of Armenia; to foreign journalists, researchers and persons invited to public or religious service; and to the refugees.

The temporary residence permit is granted for up to one year, and may be extended every time for a period of not more than one year. View residence requirements .

Benefits

Foreign citizens who have a valid residence permit for Armenia and who make all social security payments related to pension provision are entitled to a pension equal to that of citizens of Armenia. 
Pension System Awareness Centre



Ulnetsu St.,
68 Building,
Yerevan 0069 Armenia



Law of the Republic of Armenia on State Pensions

Ministry of Social Security

Foreign citizens who have a valid residence permit for Armenia are entitled to receive state subsidies.

link to mainstream page for UK benefits

UK retiring abroad advice

Driving licences and vehicles

When driving through Armenia roads can be of a poor standard, particularly in rural areas.

driving licence authority in Armenia

Traffic Police, Police of the Republic of Armenia



Isakovi Ave.
9 Building,
Yerevan 0015




  Armenia Department for Offences detected through CCTV cameras: (+374) 10 562974 Duty: +374-10-522763
records and examinations department




Gajegortsneri St.,
76 Building, 
Yerevan 0008, Armenia




  
    Vehicle Registration Department: (+374) 10 430295, (+374) 10 430298
  
  
    Driver’s License Department: (+374) 10 430391
  
  
    Vehicle Registration Department: (+374) 10 430295 , (+374) 10 430298
  
  
    Driver’s License Department: (+374) 10 430391
  


Finance

Cheques and credit cards are not generally used within Armenia.  Prices for goods and services are often quoted in US Dollars, but by law, payment must be made in the Armenian Dram.  Many ATMs can be found in Yerevan from which you can draw money using Maestro or Visa cards. 

Foreign currency exchanges are also available in branches of the major banks, exchange bureaus and in some supermarkets. Maestro credit and debit cards are accepted in some big shops and restaurants in Yerevan.

opening a bank account in Armenia

investing your money Invest Guide Armenia

Taxation: The Tax system in Armenia

Armenian Pocket Tax Book

Guidance on bringing medication into Armenia

Health Guide - TourArmenia

Ministry of Health Email:info@moh.am

The Armenian Embassy in London

Social ethics and traditions

Link to guides on laws and customs in the country:

Traditions in Armenia. Wedding, birth of child, national holidays – traditions in Armenia. Wedding, birth of child, national holidays, hospitality, funeral customs, dwelling and clothes. Armenian cognac.

Holidays and traditions in Armenia – holidays and traditions. Armenian Public Holidays. January 1, 2- New Year – is celebrated a whole week after the holiday which starts on December 31.

Culture of Armenia - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia – the culture of Armenia encompasses many elements that are based on the geography, literature, architecture, dance, and music of the people.

Culture - Armenia information – from ancient times, Armenians have cherished their artistic traditions, which reflect a unique culture and landscape. Aspects of everyday life are expressed in the most artistic fashion, in needlework, embellishments, carvings and design.

Armenian traditions, tours in Armenia – customs and traditions, history, sights, visa, restaurants and cafes, videos, weather, currency converter.

Armenian wedding traditions – ‘Harsanik’ – Harsanik.com is the most comprehensive Armenian wedding directory.

Armenia national traditions – ‘Mongabay’ – Armenia-National Traditions from the Country Studies Program, formerly the Army Area Handbook Program.

Armenian traditions - Yevaylen’ – posts about Armenian traditions written by Krikorian.

Fructus Armeniacus: Traditions – traditions and customs of the Armenian people, formed during many centuries, are their pride.

Returning to the UK

Prior to leaving Armenia deregister with health authorities, tax authorities, and the British Embassy.

The exit of foreigners from the Republic of Armenia may be prohibited:


  if criminal proceedings have been instituted against him - until the termination of such criminal proceedings
  if he has been convicted - until the sentence has been served or lifted
  if there is a court sentence or decision in regard to him - until the court sentence or decision has been executed or lifted


Criminal Record Certificate (also known as Police Clearance Certificate) of the Republic of Armenia can be obtained from the Consular Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia

Disclaimer

This information is provided as a general guide and is based upon information provided to the embassy by the relevant local authorities and may be subject to change at any time with little or no notice. The FCDO and the British Embassy will not be liable for any inaccuracies in this information. British nationals wishing to obtain any further information must contact the relevant local authority.





      
        
    Published 15 November 2013
    Last updated 10 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 March 2021
              Coronavirus section added with a link to guidance on vaccines
            
            
              25 November 2013
              Have changed minor details
            
            
              18 November 2013
              Inserted some new information.
            
            
              15 November 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Living in Moldova

  




      

    Collection

  


        Living in country guides

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Asia
        Europe

  


  

  


    
  


    