
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apprentice guide to assessment
  

  
  
  
      
  A best practice guide for apprentices to understand how they will be assessed during their end-point assessment.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      28 September 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How you will be assessed

        
        
          Starting your apprenticeship

        
        
          During your apprenticeship

        
        
          Preparing for gateway and completing end-point assessment

        
        
          Results, feedback and celebration after end-point assessment

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
How you will be assessed

All apprentices in England are assessed at the end of their training to ensure they are competent in their occupation and can perform all the aspects of their role.

You’ll be assessed to check the knowledge, skills and behaviours you have learned throughout your apprenticeship. This is called an end-point assessment. This is an opportunity to showcase the skills you have learned during your apprenticeship.

Completing your apprenticeship and passing your end-point assessment means that you are competent in your chosen occupation and are ready to progress in your career.

To get the best out of your apprenticeship, it is helpful to think about your end-point assessment when you begin your training.

This best practice guide outlines the roles and responsibilities of apprentices in relation to end-point assessment throughout their whole apprenticeship.

Starting your apprenticeship

End-point assessment is different for each apprenticeship.

The end-point assessment plan will outline the end-point assessment for each apprenticeship.

End-point assessment must include a minimum of 2 distinct assessment methods. These methods can include:


  practical assessment
  a project
  an interview and presentation
  written or multiple-choice tests
  an observation in the workplace


When you’re applying to an apprenticeship, it’s important to understand how you will be assessed and what areas of learning you will be assessed on. You can view the assessment plan for each apprenticeship course on the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education website.

Who will conduct your assessment?

End-point assessment is carried out by an independent organisation known as an end-point assessment organisation (EPAO). They will be different to the training provider.

During your induction, ask your employer and training provider how you will be assessed and what the end-point assessment process looks like for you. This will put you in the best position to succeed and be prepared for end-point assessment.

You should ask your employer and training provider:


  what is expected of you at end-point assessment
  the timeline for your apprenticeship
  if there are any professional body timelines or regulations relating to your occupation
  what success looks like in your apprenticeship
  what practice assessment materials are available


You should make your employer and training provider aware of any additional needs you may have so they can make any reasonable adjustments.

A reasonable adjustment relates to an adjustment that helps to reduce the effect of a disability or a physical or mental health condition, which may place you at a disadvantage compared to others.

During your apprenticeship

Make yourself familiar with the ways that you will be assessed in your end-point assessment.

You should complete mock assessments for all parts of your end-point assessment to make sure you will be able to demonstrate the relevant knowledge, skills and behaviours.

Your training provider or end-point assessment organisation will be able to provide these for you.

To prepare for your assessment well in advance, you should:


  check if you need any materials for your assessment, such as a portfolio of evidence
  provide your end-point assessment organisation with written permission to apply for your certificate
  confirm your personal details so that the certificate is correct


Preparing for gateway and completing end-point assessment

Gateway

During a period called gateway, your employer and training provider will decide if you’re ready to complete your end-point assessment.

To prepare for gateway, you should:


  confirm your end-point assessment organisation has your written permission to apply for your certificate
  confirm your personal details with the end-point assessment organisation so that the certificate is correct
  complete any work required for your end-point assessment in advance, such as a project, report or presentation


If you have met all the gateway requirements, your end-point assessment organisation will make arrangements for your end-point assessment.

Gateway requirements may include English and maths as set out in the end-point assessment plan.

End-point assessment

To prepare for your end-point assessment, you should:


  review the assessment plan to re-familiarise yourself with the assessment methods so you know what to expect
  make use of all practice materials shared with you to understand the different assessment methods
  make sure any work required has been completed and submitted
  speak with other apprentices or past apprentices to get tips for assessment


Find out in advance:


  the date and time of your end-point assessment
  where your end-point assessment is and how you will get there
  any equipment you will need, such as pens or a calculator
  any technology you will need to use for your assessment
  when and how you will find out your results


Make sure you practice with any technology that you’re unfamiliar with.

Results, feedback and celebration after end-point assessment

Your end-point assessment organisation will let you know your results, and request your certificate if you’re successful.

Resits and retakes

If you fail your end-point assessment you are able to resit or retake.

A resit involves resitting one or more components of your assessment without further training.

A retake involves doing further training before you do your assessment again.

You cannot do a resit or a retake to improve your original grade if you have passed your end-point assessment.

Celebrating your achievement

Completing your end-point assessment and passing your apprenticeship is a huge achievement that should be celebrated.

With some apprenticeships, you may also achieve a specific qualification or professional recognition.

Sharing your success story could inspire others to consider an apprenticeship and help other apprentices taking end-point assessment.

Next steps
You should speak to your employer and training provider about the next steps in your career. Your training and experience will help you take your career in the direction you want.

You may want to consider undertaking another apprenticeship at a higher level to further develop and progress.

Get help

If you need help or you’re unhappy with your end-point assessment organisation, visit apprenticeship service support.





      
        
    Published 28 September 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Support your apprentice through end-point assessment
        End-point assessment organisation guide to delivering high-quality assessment of apprenticeships
        What you need to know before applying to be an apprentice end-point assessment organisation
        ESFA financial health assessment
        Introduction to the register of end-point assessment organisations

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Apprenticeships, traineeships and internships

  


  

  


    
  


    