
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Information for ticket holders attending the Euro 2020 Events Research Programme (ERP) matches
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for those attending the EURO 2020 matches being played at Wembley Stadium on 13 June and 18 June 2021.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      8 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Information for ticket holders attending the Euro 2020 Events Research Programme matches
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Euro 2020 Events Research Programme matches: Ticket holder Q&A
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    UEFA EURO 2020 international ticket holders: Suggested Asymptomatic Test Site (ATS) locations in London
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Euro 2020 Events Research Programme matches: Privacy Notice
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
As a ticket holder for the Events Research Programme UEFA EURO 2020 matches at Wembley Stadium on 13 June and 18 June, mandatory stadium entry requirements are now in place for all ticket holders.

It is essential that all ticket holders (aged 11 and older) comply with these requirements to guarantee stadium entry on match day.


For ticket holders based in the UK:


  
    Proof of a negative Lateral Flow Test (LFT), reported and demonstrated via a text message or email from NHS Test and Trace. This can be on your device (including a screenshot) or a printout. The test needs to be taken within 48 hours of the time stadium gates open (meaning 3 hours before match kick-off).
  
  
    Or proof of full vaccination - both doses received at least 14 days prior to the match (demonstrated via the NHS App or via the Scottish or Welsh vaccination record services).
  




For ticket holders based elsewhere:


  
    Proof of a negative Lateral Flow Test (LFT), reported and demonstrated via a text message or email. The test needs to be taken within 48 hours of the time stadium gates open (meaning 3 hours before match kick-off).
  
  
    Any other test results, e.g. a PCR test result from a private company, will not be accepted and entry will be denied.
  




Failure to provide one of these forms of evidence will mean you are unable to enter the stadium.



All ticket holders should expect queues at both the Outer Security Perimeter and entrances to the stadium.



You must arrive in the entry time slot indicated on your match ticket.


Find out how to take an NHS Lateral Flow Test or show vaccine Certification on the National Health Service (NHS) App.



        
      

      
    Published 8 June 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Health and wellbeing during coronavirus

  




      

    World locations

  


        UK and the Commonwealth

  


  

  


    
  


    