
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Boosting access for SMEs to energy efficiency (BASEE) competition: winning projects
  

  
  

  
    
  The winning projects will develop new business models that encourage take up of energy efficiency projects by small and medium enterprises (SMEs).



  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      17 March 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    BASEE: projects selected for Phase 2
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    BASEE: Phase 2 project summaries and Q&A
    
        PDF, 221KB, 13 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The BASEE competition has offered up to £6 million of funding for innovative solutions that reduce transaction costs through economies of scale through harmonised and simple practices that encourage the take up of energy efficiency by SMEs.

The competition helps address some of the key market failures faced by SMEs such as:


  lack of economies of scale
  high upfront capital costs
  high transaction costs
  difficulty accessing finance


14 projects were selected to receive Phase 1 funding to develop feasibility studies for their solutions. 8 of those projects were awarded Phase 2 funding to develop their solutions.

The BASEE competition is closed for new applications. Details of the competition’s aims and objectives can be found in the competition guidance.




        
      

      
    Published 17 March 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Energy efficiency

  


  

  


    
  


    