
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Vaccination of people working or deployed in care homes: operational guidance
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            العربيَّة
        
        
            বাংলা
        
        
            Español
        
        
            فارسی
        
        
            français
        
        
            જોર્જિયન
        
        
            हिंदी
        
        
            नेपाली
        
        
            ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ਗੁਰਮੁਖੀ
        
        
            Polski
        
        
            Română
        
        
            Soomaali
        
        
            Shqip
        
        
            Türkçe
        
        
            Українська
        
        
            اردو
        
        
            中文
        
    
  

  


  
    
  From 11 November 2021, anyone working or volunteering in a care home will need to be fully vaccinated against coronavirus (COVID-19), unless exempt.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department of Health and Social Care

      
      Published
      4 August 2021
      Last updated
      
        19 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccination of people working or deployed in care homes: operational guidance
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ڤاكسین لێدان بەوكەسانەى كە كاردەكەن لە یان نێردراون بۆ خانەى چاودێرى: ڕێنوێنى كردارەكى (guidance in Kurdish Sorani)
    
        PDF, 534KB, 31 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Pagbabakuna laban sa Coronavirus (COVID-19) ng mga taong nagtatrabaho o ipinapadala sa mga bahay-kalinga: patnubay sa pagpapatupad at pagkilos (guidance in Tagalog)
    
        PDF, 361KB, 40 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance has been produced to help support the implementation of the Health and Social Care Act 2008 (Regulated Activities) (Amendment) (Coronavirus) Regulations 2021 (‘the regulations’).

These regulations require registered persons (service providers) at all Care Quality Commission (CQC) registered care homes (which provide accommodation together with nursing or personal care) to ensure that anyone who works or volunteers in the indoor premises of that care home must demonstrate that they have been vaccinated or have an exemption.

This guidance is also available in an easy-read version in English.



        
      

      
    Published 4 August 2021
    Last updated 19 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 October 2021
              In the English language version, updated the sections 'If an individual has been vaccinated outside of the UK', 'Groups that can get a medical exemption', 'How to demonstrate your vaccination status' and 'Exemptions' with more information on temporary and formal medical exemptions.
            
            
              3 September 2021
              Adding link to easy-read version of the guidance in English.
            
            
              16 August 2021
              Added translations of the guidance in Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese (Simplified), Farsi, French, Gujarati, Hindi, Kurdish (Sorani), Nepali, Punjabi (Gurmukhi), Polish, Romanian, Somali, Spanish, Tagalog, Turkish, Ukranian and Urdu.
            
            
              5 August 2021
              Added HTML version.
            
            
              4 August 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        COVID-19 vaccination of people working or volunteering in care homes (easy read)
        COVID-19 vaccination and blood clotting
        COVID-19 vaccination: women of childbearing age, currently pregnant or breastfeeding
        Temporary medical exemptions for COVID-19 vaccination of people working or deployed in care homes
        COVID-19 medical exemptions: proving you are unable to get vaccinated

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Carers' health
        Healthcare workers, carers and care settings during coronavirus 
        Vaccinations for coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    