
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    College corporation financial management good practice guides
  

  
  

  
    
  Information outlining good practice in college corporation financial management and assurance

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      17 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        17 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Streamlined energy and carbon reporting for college corporations
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    The scope of work of audit committees and internal auditors in college corporations
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ILR data integrity guidance
    
        PDF, 367KB, 41 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ESFA.GOVUK-ENQUIRIES@education.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ILR data integrity guidance (web accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Guides for college corporation:


  governors
  accounting officers
  principals/executive leaders
  chief financial officers (CFOs)


These guides do not replace or modify any requirements set out in the college accounts direction (CAD) or the post-16 audit code of practice (P16ACOP). They aim to provide suggestions about good practice.

You can find more good practice information at the Association of Colleges.



        
      

      
    Published 17 June 2020
    Last updated 17 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 August 2021
              Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting for College Corporations document updated.
            
            
              9 July 2021
              ILR Data Integrity Guidance added to the web page.
            
            
              23 September 2020
              We have published the latest good practice guide, on the scope of work of audit committees and internal auditors in college corporations.
            
            
              17 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Financial management for further education providers

  


  

  


    
  


    