
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Destroying spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine during coronavirus (COVID-19)
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Cymraeg
        
    
  

  

  
      
  Find out about temporary changes to the destruction of spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine if you're a brewer, cider producer, wine maker or publican. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      30 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        14 July 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who can destroy spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine

        
        
          How long will the change apply

        
        
          What you need to do

        
        
          Evidence we need

        
        
          Adjusting your monthly returns

        
        
          Get more information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
HMRC has introduced a temporary measure to help in the destruction of spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine during coronavirus for:


  brewers
  cider producers
  wine or made-wine makers
  publicans


Normally the destruction of alcohol must be supervised by a responsible person from the brewery, cider producer or winery. Due to social distancing requirements this is currently difficult to do.

Who can destroy spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine

You can now appoint the publican or an agreed person at the premises to carry out the destruction of spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine. An Authorised Company Representative does not need to be present.

You must follow health and safety conditions and agree this with the person carrying out the destruction.

More guidance for publicans destroying spoilt beer

Spoilt beer should be managed by following the food and drink waste hierarchy, with disposal to the sewer considered as the last option. You should seek permission from the owning brewer before making arrangements to return, re-purpose or dispose of beer.

If a risk assessment shows that it is safe to remove full containers of beer from the premises you should avoid disposal using the sewer, and other options for management of spoilt beer should be used. For example, spoilt beer may be re-purposed as:


  an addition to animal feed - for more information on how to supply spoilt beer directly to farms, contact James McCulloch at the Agricultural Industries Confederation, by email: James.McCulloch@agindustries.org.uk

  a feed for anaerobic digestion - for more information on how to supply spoilt beer directly to anaerobic digestion plant operators, contact:
    
      Jenny Grant at the Association for Renewable Energy and Clean Technology, by email: jenny@r-e-a.net

      Sam Hinton at the Anaerobic Digestion and Bioresources Association, email: Sam.Hinton@adbioresources.org

    
  


Where re-purposing of beer is not possible you should contact your water company. They will provide instructions on how to safely dispose of beer into public sewers.

Applications to water companies can either be made:


  individually by you, as a publican
  by the operating company for more than one site



If you and your operating company make duplicate applications your request may be delayed.


How long will the change apply

This temporary change will apply while coronavirus social distancing restrictions remain in place.


HMRC will give at least 30 days’ notice before withdrawing these temporary measures.


What you need to do

You must continue to keep:


  an audit trail confirming destruction of duty-paid beer, cider, wine or made-wine
  evidence of a full credit of the duty paid, or replacement of the goods to your customer or the owner of the goods at the time they became spoilt
  a spoilt beer, cider, wine or made-wine record


Evidence we need

If you claim the relief you must be satisfied that destruction has taken place and keep suitable evidence. For example, evidence can be in the form of a video. The agreed person at the premises can record this and give it to the brewer, cider producer or wine and made-wine maker for their records.

Adjusting your monthly returns

Brewers

You can adjust your monthly returns and calculate the duty you owe on form EX46.

Cider and wine or made-wine producers

You can adjust your monthly returns and calculate the duty you owe on form EX606 if you are a:


  cider producer
  wine producer


Get more information

Find out more about the effects of the law and regulations covering the production, storage and accounting of duty on:


  beer
  cider and perry
  wine or made-wine






      
        
    Published 30 March 2020
    Last updated 14 July 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 July 2020
              Information about how spoilt beer can be re-purposed has been updated.
            
            
              26 June 2020
              Additional guidance has been added for publicans destroying spoilt beer.
            
            
              1 May 2020
              We have added a Welsh language translation.
            
            
              30 April 2020
              We have amended temporary measures to include cider, wine or made-wine in addition to beer. This includes advice to cider producers and wine and made-wine makers in addition to brewers and publicans.
            
            
              31 March 2020
              Guidance about what you need to do as a brewer has been updated.
            
            
              30 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Monthly returns for Wine Duty (Excise Notice 163a)
        Excise Notice 226: Beer Duty
        Excise Notice 163: wine production
        Cider Duty
        Monthly returns for Cider Duty (Excise Notice 162a)
        Beer Duty

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Pay Beer Duty
        Beer Duty

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Alcohol duties
        Paying HMRC

  


  

  


    
  


    