
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus support from Business Representative Organisations and Trade Associations
  

  
  
  
      
  Business Representative Organisations and Trade Associations are providing coronavirus related support for specific sectors.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      3 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        2 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Aerospace and Defence, and Aviation

        
        
          Agriculture

        
        
          Architecture

        
        
          Arts, Libraries and Museums

        
        
          Automotive

        
        
          Chemical, Health Technology and Pharmaceutical

        
        
          Construction

        
        
          Creative

        
        
          Energy

        
        
          Engineering and Manufacturing

        
        
          Entertainment

        
        
          Events

        
        
          Export

        
        
          Fashion

        
        
          Finance

        
        
          Food supply

        
        
          Hair and beauty

        
        
          Health

        
        
          Hospitality

        
        
          Housing

        
        
          Infrastructure

        
        
          Labour and recruitment

        
        
          Legal

        
        
          Life science

        
        
          Maritime

        
        
          Marine

        
        
          Professional and Business Services Sector

        
        
          Retail

        
        
          Small businesses

        
        
          Space

        
        
          Sport

        
        
          Technology

        
        
          Tourism

        
        
          Transport

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The government is working closely with Business Representative Organisations and Trade Associations to support the national response to coronavirus.

Below is a list of organisations you can speak with to get advice. Many of these organisations are also happy to respond to non-member queries related to coronavirus.

Many of these websites also include sector-specific guidance and Q&A. This list does not cover all trade associations and business representatives.

Aerospace and Defence, and Aviation

Aerospace, Defence, Security and Space (ADS)

ADS represents and supports UK businesses operating in the aerospace, defence, security and space sectors.

For more information on coronavirus in the aerospace and defence sector, visit ADS’s COVID-19 hub or email them at covid19@adsgroup.org.uk.

Airport Operators Association (AOA)
The AOA is a trade association representing the interests of UK airports. They are publishing regular updates on coronavirus.

Agriculture

Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB)

The AHDB equip the industry with easy to use, practical know-how. AHDB is a statutory levy board and is funded by farmers, growers and others in the supply chain. Visit the AHDB coronavirus page for more information.

British Florist Association (BFA)

The BFA is the trade association representing the interests of professional florists. Visit the BFA coronavirus page for more information.

National Farmers Union (NFU)

The NFU is the representative body for agriculture and horticulture in England and Wales. Visit the NFU coronavirus page for more information. If you are a farmer or a grower, you can also fill out a form to request information about your specific issue.

If you are an NFU member, you can access advice and information as normal through the CallFirst service.

Architecture

Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA)

RIBA is a global professional membership body that serves its members and society in order to deliver better buildings and places, stronger communities and a sustainable environment. Visit the RIBA coronavirus page or email info@riba.org for more information.

Arts, Libraries and Museums

Arts Council England

The Arts Council England champions and develops art and culture across England. See the Arts Council England COVID-19 support page..

Independent Publishers Guild (IPG)

The IPG is a trade body that represents independent book publishers in the UK and Republic of Ireland.

Visit the IPG website for more coronavirus related information.

Museums Association

Museums Association represents the interests of privately owned museums. Visit the Museums Association website for more coronavirus related information.

National Museum Directors’ Council (NMDC)

NMDC represents the leaders of the UK’s national collections and major regional museums. Visit the NMDC website for more coronavirus related information.

Publishers Association

The Publisher Association is a member organisation for UK publishing, representing companies of all sizes and specialisms.

Visit the Publisher Association website for more coronavirus related information.

Automotive

The British Industrial Truck Association (BITA)

BITA is the trade association for forklift truck manufacturers and suppliers, suppliers of associated components and services, and the materials handling media in the UK. Visit the BITA coronavirus information page for more information.

The Motorsport Industry Association (MIA)

MIA is the trade association for motorsport, high-performance engineering and tuning sectors. Email maddison.sreeves@the-mia.com for more information.

The National Franchise Dealer Association (NFDA)

The NFDA is the trade association for franchise car dealers. For more COVID-19 information, visit the NFDA website or
contact nfda@rmif.co.uk.

Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT)

SMMT represents more than 800 automotive companies in the UK. Visit the SMMT coronavirus support page or email covid19@smmt.co.uk for more information.

Chemical, Health Technology and Pharmaceutical

Association of the British Health Tech Industries (ABHI)

ABHI is an industry association for health technology (HealthTech). Their members include both multinational companies and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).

Visit ABHI COVID-19 hub for more information. Email communications@abhi.org.uk

Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI)

ABPI represents pharmaceutical companies of all sizes in the UK. Visit ABPI COVID-19 hub for more information or email covid19@abpi.org.uk

British Pest Control

BPCA is the UK’s trade association for public health pest management. BPCA’s COVID-19 page includes free guidance for pest control professionals who carry out essential public health pest prevention and control work.

For more support email technical@bpca.org.uk

Chemical Industries Association (CIA)

CIA represents and advises chemical and pharmaceutical companies located across the UK. Visit the CIA COVID-19 page for more information.

Construction

Build UK

Build UK is a representative organisation for the UK construction industry. Visit Build UK’s coronavirus page for more information about COVID-19’s impact on construction.

The Builders Merchants Federation (BMF)

The Builders Merchants Federation (BMF)  is a trade association for businesses in the building materials’ supply chain across the UK and Ireland. It represents builders, plumbing and heating, timber and roofing merchants, and those who manufacture and supply building materials, home improvement products and renewable energy systems.

The BMF has a dedicated COVID-19 page, open to members and non-members.

Certass Trade Association

Certass is a trade association for businesses in the glazing industry across the UK. It represents double glazing and conservatory installers who are certified by Certass Certification Body to install within homes and on commercial sites across the country. For more support, visit the Certass COVID-19 page or join the Certass Facebook group for daily updates and discussions.

Construction Industry Training Board (CITB)

CITB is the industry training board for the construction sector in England, Scotland and Wales. Visit the CITB coronavirus page for more information on how CITB is supporting the construction industry.

Federation of Master Builders (FMB)

The Federation of Master Builders (FMB) represents small and medium-sized construction firms in the UK. For more COVID-19 support, visit the FMB website or email JessicaLevy@fmb.org.uk.

The Glass and Glazing Federation (GGF)

GGF is a trade body for the glass, glazing and fenestration sectors. For more COVID-19 information, visit the GGF website.

The Mineral Products Association

The Mineral Products Association is a trade association for the aggregates, asphalt, cement, concrete, dimension stone, lime, mortar and silica sand industries. For COVID-19 information, visit their Safequarry health and safety hub, developed with industry partners.

The National Association of Professional Inspectors and Testers (NAPIT)

The National Association of Professional Inspectors and Testers (NAPIT) promotes professionalism and encourage high standards within the building services and building fabrics sectors. For COVID-19 information, see NAPIT’s guidance or contact charlotte.lee@napit.org.uk.

Creative

Creative Industries Federation
Creative Industries Federation is a membership body that lobbies and advocates for the UK creative industries sector.

Visit the Creative Industries Federation website for more coronavirus related information.

The Institute of Practitioners in Advertising (IPA)

The IPA is the chartered trade body representing the interests of advertising and marketing communications agencies in the UK. Find out about COVID-19 support and advice on the IPA website.

Energy

Association for Decentralised Energy (ADE)

The Association for Decentralised Energy (ADE) is a trade association for decentralised energy, representing organisations across the industrial, commercial and public sectors. Email external.affairs@theade.co.uk

Association for Renewable Energy & Clean Technology (REA)

The REA represents the interests of the UK’s renewable energy and clean technology industry. Visit the REA website for coronavirus related information or email covid19@r-e-a.net.

Association of Meter Operators

The Association of Meter Operators is the trade association representing the field workforce that install and maintain electricity and gas meters in homes and businesses across Great Britain. For more COVID-19 support, visit the Association of Meter Operators website

Energy Industries Council (EIC)

The EIC is a not-for-profit organisation for UK-registered companies who deliver goods and services to the energy industries worldwide and covers across energy sectors including renewable energy, civil nuclear and oil and gas.

For COVID-19 support, contact Neil Golding at neil.golding@the-eic.com.

Energy UK

Energy UK is a trade association for the UK energy industry with members across all energy sectors including the electricity transmission and system operator National Grid.

Visit Energy UK’s COVID-19 hub to find more information on operating in the UK energy market under coronavirus impact.

Oil & Gas UK (OGUK)

OGUK is a representative organisation for the UK offshore oil and gas industry. Read the OGUK COVID-19 guidance.

Renewable UK

Renewable UK works on ensuring increased amounts of renewable electricity are deployed across the UK and access markets to export all over the world.

For further information and support, please contact:

Luke Clark, Head of External Affairs (07875704032, Luke.Clark@RenewableUK.com)

Robert Norris, Head of Communications (07969 229 913, Robert.Norris@RenewableUK.com).

UK District Energy Association (ukDEA)

The ukDEA brings together organisations from all parts of the district energy sector in the UK, including owners, developers, operators, contractors and suppliers of equipment and services.

Visit the ukDEA website for more information or email COVID19Support@ukdea.org.uk.

Engineering and Manufacturing

Aluminium Federation

The Aluminium Federation is a trade association representing businesses who process, trade and work with aluminium.

For more information on COVID-19, visit the Aluminium Federation website

Association of Manufacturers of Domestic Appliances (AMDEA)

AMDEA is working to ensure the continued supply of critical appliances and support to householders and the emergency services.

Find more information on COVID-19 on the AMDEA website and Register My Appliance’s website.

BEAMA

BEAMA is the UK trade association for manufacturers and providers of energy infrastructure technologies and systems.

For more information, visit the BEAMA COVID-19 page or contact info@beama.org.uk.

British Contract Furnishing Association (BCFA)

The BCFA is the British business association for the contract furnishing industry, covering the full spectrum of interior products and services in the UK and globally.

This trade association is a member of the British Furniture Confederation (BFC).

Visit the BCFA website for more coronavirus related information.

British Footwear Association

The British Footwear Association (BFA) supports new, growing and established businesses and manufacturers within the UK footwear industry.

Visit the BFA website for more information.

British Furniture Manufacturers Association (BFM)

The BFM is a trade association that represents domestic UK furniture and furnishing manufacturers. This trade association is a member of the British Furniture Confederation (BFC).

For the latest information and updates, please visit the BFM’s COVID-19 webpage.

British Printing Industries Federation (BPIF)

BPIF is a trade association for UK print, packaging and graphic communication industries. For more COVID-19 information, visit the BPIF website or 
contact charles.jarrold@bpif.org.uk.

The British Toy & Hobby Association

The British Toy & Hobby Association represents the interests of British toy manufacturers, ranging from international toy giants to small family-run businesses. For more COVID-19 information, visit the British Toy & Hobby Association website.

Electrical Contractors’ Association (ECA)

The ECA is a trade association for those working in electrical and engineering services.  Find out more at the ECA’s free information portal.

Engineering and Machinery Alliance (EAMA)

EAMA promotes the machinery and manufacturing supply chain, and the work of trade associations. Email info@eama.info to link up with sector specialists.

Furniture Makers’ Company

The Furniture Makers’ Company is a charity supporting the UK’s furniture and furnishing manufacturers. This trade association is a member of the British Furniture Confederation (BFC).

For the latest information and updates, please visit the Furniture Makers’ COVID-19 webpage.

Made in Britain

Made in Britain represents factory-owning businesses and promotes them with the official Made in Britain mark. For more COVID-19 support, visit the Made in Britain website or email john@madeinbritain.org.

Made in Midlands

Made in the Midlands represents manufacturers from across the Midlands region. Visit the Made in Midlands COVID-19 information page for more information.

Made in Yorkshire

Made in Yorkshire represents manufacturers from across the Yorkshire region. Visit the Made in Yorkshire COVID-19 information page for more information.

Make UK

Make UK represents British manufacturing and manufacturers. Visit Make UK’s coronavirus page for more information.

National Bed Federation (NBF)

The NBF is the trade association that represents the bed and mattress manufacturing sector.  This trade association is a member of the British Furniture Confederation (BFC).

For the latest information and updates, please visit the NBF’s COVID-19 webpage.

The Packaging Federation

The Packaging Federation is the trade association representing the UK packaging manufacturing industry, the sectors of glass, metal, paper and board and plastics. For more COVID-19 information, visit the Packaging Federation website or contact dicksearle@packagingfedn.co.uk.

Safety Assessment Federation (SAFed)

SAFed is a trade association representing the UK independent engineering inspection and certification industry, with members playing a key role in maintaining high standards of safety of plant, machinery and equipment in nearly every setting (from coffee shops and shopping centres, to schools and hospitals, to all industry) by the provision of statutory inspections.

For more information, visit the SAFed website.

Surface Engineering Association (SEA)

SEA represents companies across the surface engineering supply chain from suppliers of specialty chemicals through to applicators of all types of surface coatings.

SEA website has a regularly updated blog area with all the latest government guidance on COVID-19.

Entertainment

Animation UK
Animation UK is part of the UK Screen Alliance and represents UK animation companies.

Visit the Animation UK website for more coronavirus related information.

Association of Independent Music (AIM)

AIM is a not-for-profit trade body which represents the UK’s independent music sector.

Visit the AIM website for more coronavirus related information.

Association for UK Interactive Entertainment (UKIE)

The UKIE is a trade body for the UK’s games and interactive entertainment industry.

Visit the UKIE website for more coronavirus related information.

British Film Commission

British Film Commission is the UK-wide support organisation for inward investment feature film and high-end TV production and industry.

Visit the British Film Commission website for more coronavirus related information.

British Film Institute (BFI)

The BFI is the representative organisation for film, television and the moving image.

Visit the BFI website for more coronavirus related information.

British Phonographic Industry (BPI)
The BPI represents the UK recorded music industry. Visit the BPI website for more coronavirus related information.

Experience UK

Experience UK  is a trade association whose membership spans the entire experiential field – storytelling, architecture, technology, entertainment, design – as it relates to visitor attractions from museums and galleries to family entertainment centres.

Visit the Experience UK website for more coronavirus related information.

Film Export UK

Film Export UK is a trade body representing UK companies selling, marketing and distributing independent feature films around the world.

Visit the Film Export UK website for more coronavirus related information.

Music Industries Association (MIA)

The MIA represents UK businesses making and selling musical instruments and associated products. Visit the MIA website for more coronavirus related information.

Music Managers Forum (MMF)

The MMF represents UK music managers. Visit the MMF website for more coronavirus related information.

Music Publishers Association (MPA)

The MPA represents music publishers. Visit the MPA website for more coronavirus related information.

Pact

Pact is the trade association representing the commercial interests of UK independent television, film, digital, children’s and animation media companies.

Visit the Pact website for more coronavirus related information.

TIGA

TIGA represents the UK’s games industry. Members include independent games developers, in-house publisher-owned developers, outsourcing companies, technology businesses and universities.

Visit the TIGA website for more coronavirus related information.

UK Music

UK Music promotes the interests of record labels and music publishers (major and independent), songwriters, composers, lyricists, musicians, managers, producers, promoters, venues and collection societies.

Visit the UK Music website for more coronavirus related information.

UK Screen Alliance

UK Screen Alliance is a trade body representing UK film post-production companies. Visit the UK Screen Alliance website for more coronavirus related information.

Events

Business Visits and Events Partnership (BVEP)

BVEP represents trade associations involved in conferences, exhibitions, trade shows, event hospitality, ceremonies, festivals, sporting and cultural events. Coronavirus information can be found on the BVEP website.

Export

British Chambers of Commerce (BCC)

BCC is a network of chambers which build connections between businesses and share best practices to help businesses trade. Visit the BCC coronavirus page for more information.

You can also attend BCC’s free webinars about coronavirus support.

British Exporters Association (BEXA)

The British Exporters Association (BExA) is an independent national trade association representing the interests of the export community BEXA COVID-19 team are offering general business support, advice and intelligence.

Visit the BEXA website for more coronavirus related information.

Institute of Export and International Trade (IoE)

The IoE set and maintain professional standards in international trade management and export practice.

For further information on COVID-19, visit the IoE website.

Fashion

British Fashion Council

The British Fashion Council is an industry body responsible for promoting excellence in creativity, business and education to a global audience.

Visit the British Fashion Council website for more coronavirus related information.

Fashion Roundtable

Fashion Roundtable represents the voices and needs of the UK fashion and textiles industry. It is also the Secretariat for The All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) for Textiles and Fashion and the APPG for Ethics and Sustainability. Visit the Fashion Roundtable website for more information.

UK Fashion & Textile Association (UKFT)

The UKFT brings together designers, manufacturers, suppliers, agents and retailers to promote their businesses and our industry, both in the UK and throughout the world.

Visit the UKFT website for more coronavirus related information.

Finance

Institute of Financial Accountants (IFA)

The IFA is a professional membership body that supports accountants and students who work in and/or advise small to medium sized enterprises. Visit the IFA COVID-19 resources for small business page.

The Investment Association

The Investment Association represents the UK’s asset management industry representing its members’ interests to policy makers and regulators in the UK and overseas.

Visit the Investment Association website for more coronavirus related information.

UK Finance

UK Finance represents firms across banking, finance and payments industries. Visit the UK Finance coronavirus page for more information or email covid19support@ukfinance.org.uk.

Food supply

The Association of Independent Meat Suppliers (AIMS)

AIMS is the largest trade association to represent post farm gate meat and poultry processing businesses. Members range from public limited companies to small and medium-sized enterprises, and cover abattoirs, licensed cutting plants, meat wholesalers, renderers, and catering butchers. Member businesses trade both within the UK and export across the world.

Visit the AIMS website for more coronavirus related information.

British Beer and Pub Association (BBPA)
BBPA represents, supports and campaigns for the wellbeing of the beer and pub sector.

Visit the BBPA website for more coronavirus related information.

British Frozen Food Federation (BFFF)

BFFF is the UK’s frozen food trade association, with members comprising Producers, Wholesalers, Importers, Exporters, Brokers, Retailers and related Associate businesses. Visit the BFFF website for more information.

British Soft Drinks Association (BSDA)

BSDA is a trade association representing the interests of producers and manufacturers of soft drinks to the UK and devolved governments. Visit the BSDA coronavirus page for more information.

The Federation of Wholesale Distributors (FWD)

FWD is a trade association representing the interests of food and drink wholesalers to the UK and devolved governments. Visit the FWD COVID-19 support page for more coronavirus related information or contact Nikki@fwd-uk.com.

For more information on how to redistribute food to those in critical need, please visit Food2Care.

Food & Drink Exporters Association

Food & Drink Exporters Association promotes UK food and drink companies to the international buying community and represent the interest of exporters to the UK government.

Visit the Food & Drink Exporters Association website for more coronavirus related information.

Food and Drink Federation (FDF)

FDF represents businesses in the UK food and drink industry and key players in the food chain. Email Covid19enquiry@fdf.org.uk for more information.

Scotch Whisky Association (SWA)

The SWA drives the best possible global business environment for Scotch Whisky.

Visit the SWA website for more coronavirus related information.

Soil Association

The Soil Association is the membership charity campaigning for healthy, humane and sustainable food, farming and land use.

Visit the Soil Association website for more coronavirus related information.

Wines of Great Britain (WineGB)

WineGB is the national association for the English and Welsh wine industry. WineGB’s mission is to advance the multiple interests of all its members to establish Great Britain as one of the world’s great quality wine regions.

Visit the WineGB website for more coronavirus related information.

Wine & Spirits Trade Association (WSTA)

The WSTA represents companies producing, importing, exporting, transporting and selling wines and spirits in the United Kingdom. Visit the WSTA website for more coronavirus related information.

Hair and beauty

British Beauty Council

The British Beauty Council works with the beauty industry, government and others to drive excellence and growth across the industry.

Visit the British Beauty Council website for more coronavirus related information.

The Cosmetics, Toiletry & Perfumery Association

The Cosmetics, Toiletry & Perfumery Association represents companies involved in making, supplying and selling cosmetic and personal care products. For COVID-19 information, visit their webpage on advice for the cosmetics industry.

The National Hair and Beauty Federation (NHBF)

The NHBF is a trade association for hairdressing, barbering and beauty salon owners. Visit the NHBF website for more coronavirus related information.

Health

The Association of Physical and Natural Therapists (APNT)

The APNT represents physical and natural health therapists across the UK. Visit the APNT website for more coronavirus related information.

Federation of Ophthalmic and Dispensing Opticians (FODO)

FODO is the representative professional body for eye care providers across the UK. For coronavirus related support, email info@fodo.com.

GAMBICA

GAMBICA is the trade association for Instrumentation, Control, Automation and Laboratory Technology in the UK. For more information, visit the GAMBICA COVID-19 page or contact info@gambica.org.uk.

National Community Hearing Association (NCHA)

The NCHA is the representative professional body for community hearing care providers across the UK. For coronavirus support, email info@the-ncha.com.

Hospitality

British Institute of Innkeeping (BII)

The British Institute of Innkeeping exists to support, inspire, celebrate and promote the talented individuals working across all areas of the licenced trade from apprentices to bar-staff, pub chefs, managers, tenants, lessees and freetraders. Check the British Institute of Innkeeping coronavirus page for more information.

UKHospitality

UKHospitality is the national trade body for businesses providing hospitality, tourism and leisure. Check the UKHospitality coronavirus page or email CV19@ukhospitality.org.uk for more information.

UK Weddings Taskforce

Established by industry professionals and sector associations, the Taskforce aims to support the recovery of wedding businesses through the COVID-19 pandemic.

Read their website for more information.

Housing

Associated Retirement Community Operators (ARCO)

ARCO is a trade body for the UK’s housing with care sector. They are providing a wide range of free specialist materials to support both member and non-member organisations during COVID-19 on the ARCO website or contact info@arcouk.org.

Infrastructure

British Expertise International (BEI)

BEI is a member organisation for companies exporting infrastructure, capacity building and international development, with a particular focus on the dynamic and growing markets of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, Latin America and South East Europe.

For COVID-19 support and guidance, email ds@strategyinternational.co.uk.

Business Services Association (BSA)

The BSA represents large and small businesses and Voluntary Community and Social Enterprise (VCSE) organisations providing service and infrastructure projects across the private and public sectors.  Visit the BSA website for COVID-19 information and contact details.

Labour and recruitment

Association of Labour Providers

The Association of Labour Providers represents businesses who supply labour into the UK consumer goods sector. Visit the Association of Labour Providers’ website for more coronavirus information.

Association of Recruitment Consultancies (ARC)

ARC is a professional trade association representing recruitment agencies, businesses and consultancies across all business sectors. ARC provides business and legal support as well as representation to government and other bodies. Visit the ARC website for more coronavirus information or send your enquires to info@arc-org.net.

Association of Professional Staffing Companies Ltd (APSCo)

APSCo is an international organisation, supporting professional staffing sectors. They can offer legal guidance and policy-related support to recruiters, end-users, candidates and other affected parties. Email info@apsco.org for more information.

The Employment Agents Movement (TEAM)

TEAM is a network of independent recruiters. For more COVID-19 information, visit the TEAM website or contact team@jobsatteam for more information.

Recruitment and Employment Confederation (REC)

REC is the business body for staffing and recruitment firms, including temporary and permanent workers. The REC can offer recruiters legal advice and guidance, business support, briefing on key policy issues and representation of the sector to government. Email covidsupport@rec.uk.com for more information.

Legal

The Law Society of England and Wales

The Law Society of England and Wales is the independent professional body for solicitors. Visit the Law Society coronavirus page or email coronavirus@lawsociety.org.uk for more information.

Life science

BioIndustry Association (BIA)
The BIA is the trade association for innovative life sciences in the UK.

Life sciences companies should visit the BIA website for further advice plus access to regular BIA COVID-19 webinars hosted with key industry players.

Maritime

British Ports Association (BPA)

BPA represents the interest of port members to the UK and devolved governments. Visit the BPA coronavirus page for more information.

Maritime UK

Maritime UK is the collective voice for the UK’s maritime sector comprising the shipping, ports, services, engineering and leisure marine industries. Visit the Maritime UK website for more coronavirus related information.

Marine

British Marine

British Marine is a trade association for the UK leisure, superyacht and small commercial marine industry.  British Marine represents businesses including boat builders, chandlers, brokers, marinas, passenger boats and engines.

Visit the British Marine website for more coronavirus related information.

Professional and Business Services Sector

Advertising Association (AA)

The Advertising Association promotes the role and rights of responsible advertising and its value to people, society, businesses and the economy. They are publishing regular updates on coronavirus on the AA website.

Association of British Insurers (ABI)

ABI represents the UK’s insurance and long-term savings industry. Visit ABI’s coronavirus hub for more information, or contact them.

Association of Independent Professionals and the Self-Employed (IPSE)

IPSE supports the self-employed including freelancers, contractors, consultants and independent professionals with training, information and campaigning. Visit the IPSE coronavirus hub for more information.

You can also watch IPSE’s webinar on IR35 and coronavirus.

Association for Consulting and Engineering (ACE)

ACE is a trade body for consultants, engineers and infrastructure providers. It champions infrastructure to government and other stakeholders. Find more information on ACE’s coronavirus support..

Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA)

CIMA represents management accountants across the globe. CIMA’s free business recovery toolkit helps businesses deal with the effects of coronavirus. They also have a CIMA coronavirus resource centre.

Chartered Management Institute (CMI)

The Chartered Management Institute is an accredited professional institution for management based in the United Kingdom. CMI’s coronavirus hub brings together practical advice for managers of both SMEs and large businesses.

Confederation of Business Industry (CBI)

CBI speaks on behalf of businesses across every region, sector and size. Visit the CBI coronavirus hub for more information.

Enterprise Nation

Enterprise Nation supports new and growing businesses through a community of advisers and other businesses. Visit the Enterprise Nation coronavirus support page for more information.

You can also attend a series of free webinars through Enterprise Nation’s website.

Institute of Directors (IOD)

IOD represents business leaders in the UK. Visit the IOD coronavirus hub for more information.

Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW)

ICAEW is a professional membership organisation that promotes, develops and supports chartered accountants and students worldwide. Contact ICAEW for more help or information for coronavirus related issues.

You can also attend a series of free online webinars about coronavirus support from the ICAEW website.

Management Consultancies Association (MCA)

The Management Consultancies Association (MCA) represents the consulting industry and management consulting firms. Visit the MCA coronavirus page or check MCA events and courses that may help you through this time.

Retail

Association of Convenience Stores

The Association of Convenience Stores (ACS) is the voice of local shops. Visit the ACS coronavirus hub for more information on compensatory measures for business, advice on home deliveries, social distancing measures and resources for retailers to use in their stores.

For other enquires please email acs@acs.org.uk.

British Allied Trades Federation (BATF)

The BATF represents retailers; metal finishers, jewellers; goldsmiths; leathergoods; travelling and fashion accessories; giftware and tabletop.

Visit the BATF website for more coronavirus related information.

British Home Enhancement Trade Association

The British Home Enhancement Trade Association is the trade association for manufacturers, suppliers and distributors involved in DIY home improvement, garden, housewares.

Visit the British Home Enhancement Trade Association website for more coronavirus related information.

British Independent Retailers Association

British Independent Retailers Association (BIRA)  is a membership association dedicated to retail businesses. BIRA has members in all sectors of retail, from small hardware shops to independent department stores.

Visit the BIRA website more coronavirus-related information.

British Retail Consortium (BRC)

BRC’s purpose is to make a positive difference to the retail industry. For further information as to how they can support you with coronavirus related impacts on your business, email their Director of Business and Regulations, Tom Ironside tom.ironside@brc.org.uk.

Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association

The Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association represents all types of companies involved in making, supplying and selling cosmetic and personal care products.

Visit the Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association website for more coronavirus related information.

Federation of Independent Retailers (NFRN)

NFRN provides advice, support and advocacy for independent retailers in the news and convenience sectors. Details of services such as its legal, HR and business support and its coronavirus information hub can be found on the NFRN website.

Gardenex

Gardenex is a trade association that helps British manufacturers to export, and international trade buyers to find British garden products.

Visit the Gardenex website for more coronavirus related information.

The Giftware Association (GA)

The GA is the UK trade association serving the gift and home industry with members ranging from retailers to suppliers, high street brands names to individual craftspeople and many others.

Visit the GA website for more coronavirus related information.

IMRG - The UK’s Online Retail Association

IMRG is the UK association for online retail helping  members understand and improve their online retail performance through a busy programme of performance benchmarking, data analysis, insight, best practice-sharing and events.

During the COVID-19, IMRG are opening their weekly sales performance and insight updates for all retailers at no cost. Visit the IMRG website for more information.

National Association of British Markets (NABMA)

NABMA is the trade association for British markets. They provide a range of services, representation, networking and publications promoting markets throughout the UK and internationally.

Visit the NABMA website for more information.

National Market Traders Federation (NMTF)

The NMTF is a national trade association representing market and street traders, events retailers and mobile caterers.

Visit the NMTF website for coronavirus guidance for market traders.

Royal Warrant Holders Association

Royal Warrant Holders Association is a trade body for the suppliers of goods and services to the Royal Households of the HM Queen, HRH Duke of Edinburgh and HRH Prince of Wales.

Visit the Royal Warrant Holders Association website for more coronavirus related information.

The Savile Row Bespoke Association

The Savile Row Bespoke Association represents tailors and associated trades created to safeguard Savile Row’s unique bespoke tailoring standards.

Visit the Savile Row Bespoke Association website for more coronavirus related information.

WALPOLE

WALPOLE is a trade association representing the UK Luxury brands. Visit the WALPOLE website for more coronavirus related information.

Small businesses

Country, Land and Business Association (CLA)

CLA is the membership organisation for owners of land, property and business in rural England and Wales. Visit the CLA website for coronavirus related advice and information.

Federation of small businesses (FSB)

FSB represents small businesses and the self-employed, and provides COVID19 advice/webinars, 24/7 legal advice and support around mental health, debt recovery and employment issues. Visit the free FSB coronavirus hub for more information.

Space

UKspace

UKspace represents the UK space industry to government and other key stakeholders nationally and internationally. Email covid19@ukspace.org for more information.

Sport

UK Sport

Responsible for investing in Olympic and Paralympic sport across the whole of the UK. Visit UK Sport’s website for coronavirus related information.

Technology

CEDIA

CEDIA is the global industry association for residential technology, which focuses on cutting-edge education, standards development and professionalism in the smart home industry. Visit CEDIA’s dedicated COVID-19 recourse page for more information or email member@cedia.org.

GSM Association
The GSM Association represents the interests of mobile network operators worldwide.

Visit the GSM Association website for more coronavirus related information.

Immerse UK

Immerse UK is a network organisation that represents UK immersive companies and connects them to R&D and funding opportunities

Visit the Immerse UK website for more coronavirus related information.

TechUK

TechUK is the Trade Association for Digital Technology Companies in UK. Visit the TechUK coronavirus hub or email covid19.taskforce@techUK.org for more information.

TechWorks

TechWorks’ mission is to strengthen the UK’s deep tech capabilities as a global leader of future technologies. Email info@techworks.org.uk for more information.

Tourism

Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA)

ABTA is a UK trade association for tour operators and travel agents. Visit the ABTA coronavirus page for more information.

Association of Leading Visitor Attractions (ALVA)

The ALVA represents museums, galleries, palaces, castles, cathedrals, zoos, historic houses, heritage sites, gardens and leisure attractions. To sign up for coronavirus updates please email email@alva.org.uk.

UKInbound

UKInbound is a trade association for the UK’s inbound tourism sector. Visit the UKInbound coronavirus page for more information.

Transport

Association of Vehicle Recovery Operators Ltd (AVRO)

AVRO is the trade association for the roadside recovery industry, representing members throughout the UK and Ireland. For more COVID-19 support, visit the AVRO website or contact sara@avrouk.com.

British Vehicle Rental & Leasing Association (BVRLA)

The BVRLA is a trade body for companies engaged in vehicle rental, leasing and fleet management. For more information, visit the BVRLA coronavirus business advice page.

Freight Transport Association (FTA)

FTA represents all logistic businesses with members from the road, rail, sea and air industries as well as the buyers of freight services.

Visit the FTA coronavirus page for more information. You can also use the FTA feedback form to share your experience or inquiries.

Road Haulage Association (RHA)

RHA is a trade association for UK road transport operators. Visit the RHA coronavirus page for more information.





      
        
    Published 3 April 2020
    Last updated 2 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 February 2021
              Added details for the Cosmetic Toiletry & Perfumery Association and the Mineral Products Association.
            
            
              8 June 2020
              Added details of the National Franchise Dealer Association, the Associated Retirement Community Operators, the Association of Vehicle Recovery Operators, the Glass and Glazing Federation and the British Printing Industries Federation.
            
            
              4 June 2020
              Details for the Safety Assessment Federation, the Business Services Association and the Association of Meter Operators added.
            
            
              2 June 2020
              Added details about British Marine and Certass Trade Association.
            
            
              28 May 2020
              Added details on Made in Britain and the Federation of Master Builders.
            
            
              21 May 2020
              Added details for trade associations GAMBICA and BEAMA.
            
            
              18 May 2020
              Added details about the Aluminium Federation.
            
            
              14 May 2020
              Added details for the National Clinical Homecare Association, the Federation of Ophthalmic and Dispensing Opticians and the British Florist Association.
            
            
              11 May 2020
              Added details for the National Hair and Beauty Federation and the British Vehicle Rental and Leasing Association.
            
            
              5 May 2020
              Details for the the British Soft Drinks Association and the Road Haulage Association added.
            
            
              28 April 2020
              Details for UKInbound, the Association of British Travel Agents, the Association of Leading Visitor Attractions and the Business Visits and Events Partnership added.
            
            
              22 April 2020
              Institute of Practitioners in Advertising, Fashion Roundtable and the British Industrial Truck Association added.
            
            
              3 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Libraries as a statutory service
        Guidance on coronavirus (COVID-19) measures for elite sport
        Risk management template for event organisers

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and industry
        Funding and support for businesses during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    