
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Academy trust financial management good practice guides
  

  
  

  
    
  Information outlining good practice in academy trust financial management and assurance.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      1 March 2019
      Last updated
      
        30 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting (SECR) for academy trusts
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Operating an academy trust as a going concern
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Choosing an external auditor for an academy trust
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Academy trust deficit recovery
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Academy trust risk management
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Leasing guidance for academy trusts
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Academy trust management accounting
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Internal scrutiny in academy trusts
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Academy trust management letters
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    External audit preparation checklist for academy trusts guidance
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    External audit preparation checklist 
    
        MS Word Document, 39 KB
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Tendering 'jargon busting' guide for academy trusts
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Guides for academy trust:


  trustees
  accounting officers
  principals/executive leaders
  chief financial officers (CFOs)


These guides do not replace or modify any requirements set out in the Academy Trust Handbook (ATH) and the Academies Accounts Direction (AAD). They aim to provide suggestions about good practice.

ESFA produced these guides with input from experienced practitioners from working group 3 of the Academies Finance and Assurance Steering Group.

You can find more good practice information at the Institute of School Business Leadership (ISBL) good practice library.



        
      

      
    Published 1 March 2019
    Last updated 30 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 November 2021
              We have updated this page to add a good practice guide on tendering 'jargon busting' for academy trusts.
            
            
              4 August 2021
              We have updated the Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting good practice guide
with new requirements and calculations for 2021.
            
            
              18 May 2021
              We have updated the academy trust risk management good practice guide.
            
            
              12 January 2021
              Routine update to the guide to choosing an academy trust auditor.
            
            
              27 October 2020
              We have updated the 'Operating an academy trust as a going concern' good practice guide.
            
            
              23 September 2020
              We have updated the internal scrutiny good practice guide for academy trusts. The update includes clarification that internal scrutiny covers both financial and non-financial controls [3.1 in the Academies Financial Handbook (AFH)], removal of the option for internal audit to be performed by the external auditor [AFH 3.17 and 3.20] and confirmation that trusts can use additional individuals or organisations to support internal scrutiny where specialist non-financial knowledge is required [AFH 3.18 and 3.23].
            
            
              15 June 2020
              Added a new good practice guide on Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting (SECR)
            
            
              12 September 2019
              We've added a new good practice guide - 'External audit preparation checklist' and 'External audit preparation checklist guide'.
            
            
              31 July 2019
              Updated to add a new good practice guide on academy trust management letters.
            
            
              19 July 2019
              Page updated to add a guide to academy trust internal scrutiny.
            
            
              1 March 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Related party transactions: information for academy trusts
        Academies chart of accounts and automating the accounts return
        Academies budget forecast returns
        Academies planning calendar
        Academies budget forecast return: guide to using the online form

  




      

    Collection

  


        Academies: compliance, funding and payments
        Academy trusts: governance

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        School and academy financial management and assurance

  


  

  


    
  


    