
 World-class leaders from the worlds of investing, technology, the public sector, and business are lending their expertise to the Department of Energy’s 2022 IMPEL+ accelerator, with a mission to speed commercialization of technologies that slash buildings’ carbon footprint — an essential and urgent aspect of curbing climate change. “In the U.S., buildings are responsible for 40% of greenhouse gas emissions – more than any other sector,” said Dr. Carolyn Snyder, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency at DOE. “President Biden has set a goal of cutting U.S. emissions in half by 2030 compared to a 2005 baseline, and meeting that target will require dramatic improvements in building energy efficiency and rapid deployment of grid-integration and clean-energy technologies for buildings. IMPEL+ is helping some of the most exciting, advanced building technologies get into the marketplace, where they can help slash emissions.” IMPEL+, which stands for Incubating Market-Propelled Entrepreneurial Mindset at the Labs and Beyond, is funded by DOE’s Building Technologies Office (BTO) and implemented by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). “Think of us as an early-stage incubator and accelerator for building-energy technologies,” said Mary Hubbard, technology-to-market manager within the BTO's Emerging Technologies Program. “For 2022, we are adding an all-star panel of mentors, including private-sector investors, public-sector leaders, technical subject-matter experts from across the DOE’s national laboratory system, demonstration experts who will ensure equitable access to testing for building technologies, and entrepreneurs who have already brought building technologies to market.”“Americans already spend about 90% of their time inside buildings. As climate change continues to amplify severe weather events, that number will only rise,” said Reshma Singh, a Harvard-trained architect and LBNL’s IMPEL+ program director. “IMPEL+ is helping some of the brightest minds develop technologies that will reduce emissions from the buildings where we live and work, while also making them more innovative, climate-resilient, and healthier.”New for IMPEL+ in 2022: For the third year in a row, IMPEL+ will provide innovators with world-class pitch coaching from practitioners including serial entrepreneur J.J. Singh, co-president of Stanford Angels and Entrepreneurs; tech entrepreneur, scientist, and marketing veteran Christina Ellwood of Moreland Associates; and Whitney Hischier, lecturer at the Haas School of Business, College of Natural Resources, and School of Engineering at UC Berkeley in strategy and entrepreneurship. Coaches will lead workshops organized along three tracks:IMPEL+ offers on-ramps to public and private pipelines offering funding and access that can lead to commercialization. To date, over half of IMPEL+ innovators have been women or people of color, and applications come from across the country. Every year, IMPEL+ innovators make connections that lead to grants, awards, and invitations to participate in next-step accelerators. These are a few of the  from the 2021 cohort that IMPEL+ has helped springboard toward commercialization: “IMPEL+ provided a great network. Now I have a team of advisors in both the public and the private sectors, and I can ask them questions whenever I need to,” said 2021 IMPEL+ innovator Anna Dai of Varea Energy. Her company is developing software that helps commercial and industrial facilities save energy and water and reduce waste.IMPEL+ invites entrepreneurs, building technology professionals, small-business owners, researchers from national laboratories, university faculty members and graduate students, and other innovators to apply. Projects may include hardware, software, services, systems and solutions, and programs and policies, and are typically in the earlier stages of development.Eligibility information and a link to the IMPEL+ application can be found at . The priority deadline is November 15. The application window will be open until all available innovator positions are filled.