In a recent McKinsey survey,  indicated that building skills was the best way to close their company’s capability gaps in the next year. In fact, they cited reskilling as the preferred strategy more than twice as often as hiring. It’s no secret organizations see the value of skill building and are acting quickly—over 33 percent of leaders indicated that investment in building capabilities has increased since 2020.While these statistics are compelling, the myth still lingers that hiring is always more cost-effective. A better understanding of how to evaluate an organization’s unique situation and implement a successful reskilling program can help fully dispel that myth., we differentiated among three talent levers—redeployment, upskilling, and reskilling—and shared situations in which each is best used. As a next step, organizations must understand why each is important and how to successfully bring them to life.While there is no “one size fits all” approach, these four steps greatly increase the likelihood of success.For example, a technology company adopting a new cloud-based product strategy found that 30 percent of its workforce had skill mismatches and needed to reskill. HR and product organizations worked closely to design and deploy a learning journey grounded in adult learning principles with real-time measurement to track effectiveness. In two years, they successfully reskilled more than 6,000 employees to new roles and upskilled over 20,000 employees in their current roles.Investing in redeployment, upskilling, and reskilling shows employees that they are valued and vital to the organization’s mission. Learning new skills is a powerful source of motivation, inspiring . In fact,  say they would stay longer at a company that invested in their development. has accelerated the digitization and automation of many workplaces. The  has arrived, and there is an ongoing battle for the most valuable asset: talent. Companies that combat this challenge through thoughtful redeployment, upskilling, and reskilling will better position themselves for future success.