
        
        
        
     trading their fresh produce, they’ve looked for ways to reduce product loss from various sources including damage and expiry. They’ve used a range of tools to reduce this “shrink,” such as more accurate demand forecasts, optimizing and speeding transport, displaying products in more appealing ways, extending shelf lives, and adjusting prices frequently to maximize profits while clearing the shelves before goods spoil.
	
Before the COVID-19 pandemic and accompanying economic downturn, shrink consumed 2 to 3 percent of a typical grocer’s revenue—a significant share in an industry where razor-thin margins are common. Shrink is now rising in some regions and product categories as shoppers’ needs and preferences change faster than ever before. In ready-to-eat and ready-to-heat, for example, shrink has risen to 5 to 15 percent of revenues, significantly eating into profits. Accurate forecasting is more difficult in marketplaces roiled by the pandemic—a rolling four-week average is a better predictor of sales than year-over-year comparisons, for example.Recognizing the challenge, leading grocers around the world are already preparing for the “new normal.” By harnessing 21st-century tools, mastering new approaches, and even going back to basics, they’re giving shoppers more of what they want, in every store every day, while reducing shrink by 20 to 30 percent and reinforcing their bottom lines.Industry leaders pursue five shrink-reduction solutionsGrocers are finding innovative new ways to reduce shrink in marketplaces transformed by the pandemic. Their approaches fall into five main categories: advanced analytics to improve forecasting; more dynamic use of displays and shelf space; Cryovacing and vacuum packing; apps to clear short-dated products; and improvements in upstream operations and inbound quality control:
    
    
    
    
    
How to test concepts in storesGrocers can test most of these concepts quickly and at low cost. We recommend beginning with a review of current shrink-management practices to identify improvement opportunities and then prioritizing the most promising solutions. Grocers can take three basic approaches:
     Bespoke solutions can work wonders because they’re customized for specific retail footprints, staff and management practices, and regional context. Design and implementation can be led by employees who are connected and knowledgeable about the specificities of the company and can strengthen practices and end-to-end operations, even beyond shrink, throughout implementation. These custom solutions require time and financial resources that might be invested more profitably somewhere else, however—and they can require expertise that few retailers may have in-house today.
     Hiring a vendor often seems like an attractive option and provides access to proven systems and solutions. Some solutions can be tested and launched quickly, helping companies benefit from early adoption. But choosing the wrong vendor can be costly: several retailers have told us that they lost valuable consumer data and became beholden to providers. Others realized that some plug-and-play solutions did not build the capabilities of in-store staff, hindering their ability to continuously improve standards and processes. We recommend that grocers consider these and other trade-offs carefully.
     Many grocers are making quick progress by breaking shrink-reduction efforts into manageable, tactical solutions and working with carefully chosen third parties. This preserves their ownership of end-to-end customer and employee experiences.
Next stepsA grocer can size shrinkage-reduction opportunities with a rapid diagnostic combining hard financial metrics and observations in selected stores and warehouses—a no-regrets move that can lead to surprising discoveries. In addition to the potential financial benefits of shrink reduction, the diagnostic can include assessments of product quality and shelf and display appeal.An executive at a leading grocer said his team’s diagnostic effort “gave us a completely different way to look at operational improvements and their impact on client experience and company profitability.”Shrink is a perennial topic with grocers, and many think they have it under control. But industry leaders are using powerful new tools and techniques to delight customers, bolster financial results, and leave slower-moving competitors behind. Given low operating margins, grocers should consider a wider range of opportunities to stretch every dollar in these uncertain times.