
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apply for research support and partnerships
  

  
  
  
      
  Creating academic partnerships are central to the FCERM R&D programme. Find out how to outline your proposal when you apply for research support.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management Research and Development Programme, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, Environment Agency, Welsh Government, and Natural Resources Wales

      
      Published
      6 April 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Identify research needs and important topics

        
        
          Make your proposal appealing

        
        
          Establish what you need from the partnership

        
        
          Manage your expectations

        
        
          Complete the FCERM research support form

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management (FCERM) works with Research Councils UK and other international funders to help create agendas and push areas of joint interest.

Identify research needs and important topics

When we consider research partnerships, we look for proposals that align with our priorities and the FCERM strategies for England and Wales.

Our three principal research themes are:


  Policy, Strategy and Investment (PSI)
  Asset Management (AM)
  Incident Management and Modelling (IMM)


We also have overlapping areas of research. These focus on:


  coastal change
  carbon
  reservoir safety
  sustainability


We use these themes to understand knowledge gaps and assign research priorities.

Recent project publications from FCERM and Research Councils UK frequently detail areas that need further investigation. These needs are often responsive, led by government reviews or flood events. This is where knowledge is required, or the evidence base may be improved to reduce uncertainty in our decision-making.

Make your proposal appealing
The table below explains how we’ll assess your application, based on the level of support you need.


  
    
      Level of partnership
      Funding
      Time
      Data
      Steer
      Partnership tools
    
  
  
    
      Strategic partnership
      likely
      likely
      likely
      likely
      Partnership agreementMemorandum of understanding
    
    
      High impact delivery partnership
      possible
      likely
      likely
      likely
      Partnership agreement
    
    
      Medium impact delivery partnership
      no
      possible
      possible
      possible
      Letter of support describing inputData licences as appropriate
    
    
      Low impact delivery partnership
      no
      unlikely
      possible
      no
      Letter of support describing inputData licences as appropriate
    
    
      Watching brief
      no
      no
      no
      no
      Letter of support stating interest in outputs only
    
  


When you complete the research support form at the bottom of the page, you should consider the following factors:

Engagement
Early engagement is essential. We recognise that timescales for submissions are often tight, but we’re unable to comment on proposals that are sent too close to the deadline.

Your proposal should clearly outline what you intend to do, which we can help to steer later. You should not need us to help define it.

Industry consultants can often be useful allies to deliver coherent and focused proposals. Asking consultants may also help you embed research outputs and with the uptake and embedding of research outputs.

Problems
When you describe your work, you should clearly explain the problem it’ll address.

You should provide information that shows you’ve considered the following questions:


  What are the outstanding (scientific) knowledge gaps?
  Based on an assessment of the current evidence, how will your work fill these gaps?
  What policy challenges (operationally) does this present and what’s the real world benefit or impact?
  What input may be required from third parties to reach a successful outcome?


Risks
We recognise that in undertaking research, success is not guaranteed. You’ll need to be explicit about the risks that may impact the successful delivery of your work.

Although it’s difficult to consider the possibilities of failure, you should address the risks to show that you:


  understand the problem
  appreciate the mitigation approaches that you may need


Scope of the work
There are various methods to describe where on the research spectrum (Frascati scale, technical-readiness levels) work is positioned. You should be realistic about where your work sits and how near to market it really is.

You should say if you expect that further work to translate, develop or produce your work will be needed. We do not want to prevent innovation and basic science, however establishing a purpose and a clear line of sight is useful.

Benefits
Please be sensible when describing the benefits of your proposal. We’re interested in how you show the benefits your research could provide, rather than making assumptions.

You should make sure you understand how we currently work and what difference your research could make. 
The significance of change

We’re interested in pioneering research that may provide significant scientific and practical advances, although most improvements are incremental within FCERM.

There are a lot of stakeholders which means embedding change can be a lengthy and complex process. Please be rational about how much change will be required and try to understand existing systems and processes.

Some scientifically driven changes in operating practice may not be put in place if they need business changes or improvements to systems and data to carry them out.

Establish what you need from the partnership
You should be clear about what you need from us, whether that’s funding, time or data.

If you would like us to help steer the work, you’ll need to show that you have the governance structures in place to allow this.

Please provide us with a reasonable timeframe, stating the type of expertise you need.

Manage your expectations
We’re a small team with a large remit. Unfortunately, we cannot directly support every proposal we’re interested in.

Therefore, our focus is often towards steering large programmes of work where we can get the most relevant research output for our time. This includes programmes which have been developed in response to Research Councils UK requests.

We rarely get directly involved in:


  individual PhD and masters research
  supporting individual research fellowships


With most EU funded projects we adopt an overview, rather than a full participatory approach. There are occasionally targeted exceptions to this if the delivery means are appropriate for the knowledge we’re pursuing, in terms of timescales and scientific maturity.

Complete the FCERM research support form
The details of your application should show that you:


  have consulted us at formative stages and can adapt to meet our research needs
  will contribute to delivery of our research priorities
  have well defined objectives, aligned to our needs
  have clearly defined deliverables relevant to our work
  can achieve the scientific aims
  are also involving partners with a proven track record
  can deliver work that’ll provide significant benefit in return for our resources


The level of detail you provide should reflect the level of partnership you’re proposing. For example, high risk, considerable resource requests should provide more detail.

When submitting your application, please note that partnerships can take four weeks to approve.

FCERM research support application (ODT, 22.2KB)

If you use assistive technology, such as a screen reader, and need a more accessible version, please email: enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk.




      
        
    Published 6 April 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        National flood and coastal erosion risk management strategy for England action plan
        Flood risk management plans (FRMPs)
        Flood risk management plans (FRMPs): how to prepare them
        Flood risk planning cycles
        Development of interim national guidance on non-stationary fluvial flood frequency estimation
        About us

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Working with Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management R & D Programme

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        River maintenance, flooding and coastal erosion

  


  

  


    
  


    