
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Use precision pesticide application systems
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out how land managers can improve water quality and protect wildlife habitats by applying pesticides more accurately.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      7 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        14 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Why you should use precision equipment for pesticides

        
        
          Before you start

        
        
          Choose the right precision system to apply pesticides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

If you’re completing this action as part of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, how you do it is up to you.

The advice on this page can help you get better environmental and business benefits, but you do not have to follow it to get paid.


Why you should use precision equipment for pesticides

You can use precision systems whenever you use pesticides. You can use them in any location and at all scales of operation.

You can choose the best system to suit your farming, horticulture or forestry business.

Benefits of applying pesticide accurately

Precision systems help you to:


  use less pesticide and save money
  apply pesticides more accurately


You can use these systems to reduce:


  the impact of weather and site constraints, like uneven ground
  the risk of crop damage from over-application and double dosing
  the risk of excess pesticide being detected in your crops or products
  weed pesticide resistance


Accurate pesticide use also helps the environment by reducing the risk of:


  pesticides reaching surface and ground water
  contamination of drinking water
  harm to aquatic life
  harm to plants or animals you do not want to kill


Before you start

Research the various precision pesticide application systems to see which would be best for your current and future pesticide use.

If you need specialist machinery you could:


  buy it yourself
  retrofit new parts to existing machinery
  use a contractor to carry out the operation


Check if you can get funding for new precision pesticide application equipment.

Choose the right precision system to apply pesticides

Global positioning system (GPS)

GPS uses satellite navigation and works with many types of precision technology. It’s useful when working in the dark or where there are no tramlines to follow.

GPS helps spread pesticide evenly.

You can use GPS with:


  automatic steering, which enables the tractor or self-propelled sprayer to steer itself across the field
  pulse width modulation (PWM) sprayers, which adjust pesticide flow rate from each nozzle


Low drift nozzles

Low drift nozzles:


  reduce spray drift
  are simple and cheap
  can be retrofitted to many different types of sprayer


You can use them across the whole field or just in sensitive locations like:


  next to surface water
  alongside sensitive crops
  in areas with public access


Spot sprayers

Spot sprayers apply pesticide to the target weed or a patch of weeds, rather than the whole field. You can use a:


  vehicle with a single spray nozzle or short boom
  handheld sprayer


Advanced spot spraying systems are available. They use technology like cameras, computer recognition, GPS or artificial intelligence. They can recognise target weeds and apply pesticides only to them. You might pass over the whole field, but individual nozzles apply the spray only where needed.

Weed wipers

A weed wiper has a wick soaked in herbicide. It wipes the herbicide against the target weeds as it passes over them. A weed wiper is usually towed behind a tractor or quad bike.

You can only use a weed wiper when the target weeds are at least 10cm taller than the non-target vegetation. In grassland you can achieve this by grazing beforehand. You can use glyphosate in a weed wiper because the herbicide only touches the target weeds.

Weed wiping causes zero spray drift so you can use it:


  near water
  on sensitive sites






      
        
    Published 7 June 2021
    Last updated 14 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 December 2021
              Added link to funding options
            
            
              18 August 2021
              Added clarification that this is best practice but not mandatory advice.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Create and maintain herbal leys
        Create cultivated margins and plots for arable plants
        Provide ryegrass seed-set for birds over winter
        Create 2 year sown legume fallow
        Manage grazing on improved grassland

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Land management

  


  

  


    
  


    