
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Technological protection measures (TPMs) complaints process
  

  
  

  
    
  What to do where a TPM prevents you from benefiting from a copyright exception.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Intellectual Property Office

      
      Published
      3 November 2014
      Last updated
      
        18 May 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Guidance on the technological protection measures (TPMs) complaints process
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Notice of complaint to the Secretary of State
    
        ODT, 62.8KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Technological Protection Measures (TPMs) (also known as copy protection measures or Digital Rights Management (DRM) are often used to protect copyright works, for example, through encryption on DVDs. TPMs can have a important role in enabling copyright owners (rightsholders) to offer content to consumers in different ways, as well as protecting against unlawful copying (piracy). UK law protects the right of copyright owners to use TPMs to protect their works, and circumvention of such technology is illegal.

However, use of TPMs could potentially prevent activities that are permitted by copyright exceptions. More information is available on copyright exceptions. The law therefore provides for a complaints process that aims to ensure that a TPM does not unreasonably prevent people from benefiting from an exception. The guidance on this page gives information on when and how someone may make a complaint, other steps that they should consider and some of the factors that may influence the outcome of a complaint.




        
      

      
    Published 3 November 2014
    Last updated 18 May 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              18 May 2021
              TPMs complaints process information updated to reflect Brexit transition. Portable document format (pdf) file notice of complaint replaced with open document text (odt) to improve accessibility.
            
            
              3 November 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Copyright

  


  

  


    
  


    