
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Energy Technology List (ETL)
  

  
  
  
      
  The ETL (or Energy Technology Product List, ETPL) is a government list of energy-efficient plant and machinery.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      15 May 2015
      Last updated
      
        1 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Buyers

        
        
          Manufacturers

        
        
          The future of the ETL


        
        
          Privacy policy

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

The Energy Technology List (ETL) is a government list of energy efficient plant and machinery. In order for a product to be listed, it must meet the ETL’s robust energy saving criteria - typically set at the top 25% of products in the market.

The ETL features products such as boilers, electric motors, air conditioning and refrigeration equipment.

The list functions as an easy-to-use procurement tool for energy managers, procurement professionals, facilities managers and a wide variety of other professions and organisations. The ETL gives the added reassurance to purchasers of measured and verified energy performance. The list is available online.

The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) annually reviews the technologies and products that qualify for inclusion. The ETL is managed on behalf of BEIS by the Carbon Trust and ICF.

A full list of the technology categories currently on the ETL can be found below. If you would like to suggest a new technology category then please see the New Technology Proposal guidance.


  air-to-air energy recovery
  automatic Monitoring and Targeting (aM&T) equipment
  boiler equipment
  combined heat and power (CHP)
  compressed air equipment
  heat pumps
  heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) equipment
  high speed hand air dryers
  lighting
  motors and drives
  pipework insulation
  radiant and warm air heaters
  refrigeration equipment
  solar thermal systems and collectors
  uninterruptible power supplies
  waste heat to electricity conversion equipment


For more details about eligible product types and the amount of energy they save, see the technology factsheets about ETL product types.

Buyers

Buyers: find and compare energy energy efficient products on the ETL


Search and compare products listed by technology category. The list gives details of the manufacturers or suppliers of the products, so you are able to contact them directly.

The ETL is recognised in various sustainability assessment processes including BREEAM and SKA rating. Additionally, the Carbon Trust’s Low Carbon Workplace certification considers the use of ETL compliant products as part of the qualitative assessment.

For more details, see ETL: information for purchasers

Manufacturers


Manufacturers and suppliers: register and apply to add your product to the ETL


For more details, see ETL: information for manufacturers.

The future of the ETL

On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the Enhanced Capital Allowance (ECA) for energy and water efficient plant and machinery will end in April 2020.

However the Energy Technology List will continue to function as an easy-to-use source of information for organisations seeking independently verified energy efficient equipment.

Although businesses will no longer be able to claim an ECA on new purchases of ETL equipment from April 2020, the Annual Investment Allowance (AIA) scheme is another form of accelerated tax relief which businesses can consider when buying new equipment. The AIA was temporarily increased from 1 January 2019 for 2 years.

The ETL website is expected to move to a new digital platform in Spring 2020, with more news and content for users of the ETL.  On the website during 2020 the ETL plans to incorporate the UNICLASS classification for products. The classification system is used to categorise and manage information within a construction project, such as costing and designing. UNICLASS codes are used in Computer aided design (CAD) software and are a requirement for use within Building Information Modelling projects (BIM).

At the request of users and purchasers from the Energy Technology List (ETL), BEIS has worked with NBS to map the 140 ETL product categories against the UNICLASS codes. The resulting list can be downloaded here. This development delivers closer integration for users of the ETL, enabling users to seamlessly select verified energy efficiency products for use within their existing procurement and designing systems.

Privacy policy

General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) - Information for ETL scheme stakeholders

The ETL has been in operation since 2001. During this time BEIS, its predecessor departments and its contractors, have collected stakeholder contact records as part of the public task of delivering this scheme.

At BEIS we’re committed to protecting the personal data we hold and to being transparent about the information we are collecting about you and what we do with it. GDPR gives individuals (whether these be customers, contractors or members of staff) more control over the ways in which businesses process personal data.

To reflect the newest changes in data protection law, and our commitment to transparency, we have updated our privacy policy for the ETL scheme which can be viewed below.


  ETL privacy notice






      
        
    Published 15 May 2015
    Last updated 1 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 April 2020
              Details on the future of the ETL published in light of the Enhanced Capital Allowance (ECA) for energy and water efficient plant and machinery ending in April 2020.
            
            
              6 March 2019
              Publication of changes to the Energy Technology List.
            
            
              25 May 2018
              Added details of updated privacy policy.
            
            
              6 March 2018
              Latest Product and Criteria lists published. Note added on changes to the technologies supported under the ETL as a result of the 2017 Budget
            
            
              19 September 2016
              Energy Technology List – Updated Technology Criteria and Product Eligibility Lists for Enhanced Capital Allowances
            
            
              8 September 2016
              Energy Technology List 2016 criteria and product lists update
            
            
              17 July 2015
              updated content
            
            
              15 May 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Energy Technology List (ETL): information for manufacturers
        Energy Technology List (ETL): information for purchasers
        Enhanced Capital Allowance Scheme: Energy Technology Product List
        Energy Technology List for energy saving products
        Products removed from the energy technology product list (ETPL)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon energy

  


  

  


    
  


    