
      



  
    


      
    International treaty
  

  
  
    UK-Australia FTA Chapter 12: Telecommunications
  

  
  

  
    
  Text of chapter 12 of the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Australia.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      16 December 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Chapter 12: Telecommunications (PDF version)
    
        
            Unnumbered command paper
        
        PDF, 201 KB, 17 pages
    
      Order a copy


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email digital@trade.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This chapter contains provisions that commit to ensuring service suppliers have access to public telecommunications networks on a timely, reasonable and non-discriminatory basis.

It also commits us to work together on security and diversification in the telecommunications sector, including on infrastructure and technologies.


The agreement is not yet in force. Both the UK and Australia are required to complete their respective domestic procedures for the agreement to come into effect. Once approved by both parliaments, businesses will be able to trade under its terms.



An accessible version of this document is being created and will be available soon.





        
      

      
    Published 16 December 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Free Trade Agreement between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Australia

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Trade and investment

  




      

    World locations

  


        Australia

  


  

  


    
  


    