
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Competition: Defence Innovation Loans
  

  
  

  
    
  Loans of up to £1.6m with a below market interest rate of 7.4% per annum to help convert your mature defence innovation into a strong business proposition for defence procurement

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator and Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      24 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        2 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition Document: Defence Innovation Loan 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Defence Innovation Loan FAQs
    
        PDF, 215KB, 7 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Defence Innovation Loan - Terms and Conditions
    
        PDF, 123KB, 5 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Videos: Everything you need to know about Defence Innovation Loans
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Defence Innovation Loans - Webinar FAQs
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Defence Innovation Loans: Top Tips for Applicants 
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Proposals must be submitted via the DASA submission service. If you are not already registered to use this portal, you can register here. We recommend you use a Google Chrome browser when accessing the Enterprise Collaboration Service.


Register
If you do not already have an account..

Login
If you already have an account..


For more information on the Defence Innovation Loan Competition and how to apply for funding, please read the Competition Document: Defence Innovation Loans above.



        
      

      
    Published 24 June 2021
    Last updated 2 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 November 2021
              Added Defence Innovation Loans Webinar to the Competition Document and Video playlist.
            
            
              11 October 2021
              Additional questions added to the Defence Innovation Loans Webinar- FAQs document
            
            
              11 August 2021
              A new document has been added - 'Top Tips for Applicants'
Edit to Competition Document to show details of the two funding tracks and supporting event information.
            
            
              4 August 2021
              Added FAQ document from webinar: Defence Innovation Loans - your questions answered on Tuesday, 2 August, 2021
            
            
              28 July 2021
              Added new document with video: "Defence Innovation Loans: Everything you need to know"
            
            
              24 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Catch the ChemBio SCENT!
        CDE themed competition: synthetic biology for transparent materials
        Competition: synthetic biology for transparent materials
        CDE themed competition: beyond battery power
        Competition: beyond battery power

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    