Although recent circumstances have introduced an economic pause in some sectors, the U.S. offshore wind industry continues its steady progress toward a robust energy future with several offshore wind projects and related supply-chain investments in various stages of development. The U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) Wind Energy Technologies Office (WETO) anticipates this future by focusing its attention on an array of high-priority research and development (R&D) needs, broadly categorized as advanced technology, siting and environmental challenges, and the integration of wind power at scale with the electric grid. is a confidence builder. Until now, predicting the performance of entire wind power plants was a near-impossible task—from anticipating the various movements of turbine blades to understanding how varying wind conditions and blade motion can impact wind power plant operational efficiency.Designing and installing wind power plants is an expensive and time-consuming venture, and most current modeling and engineering tools are just not up to the task of tackling the intricacies of wind power plant flow dynamics, particularly in offshore environments. Driven by the immense power of high-performance computing (HPC), ExaWind is an open-source suite of physics codes and libraries that enables multifidelity simulation of wind turbines and wind power plants.Researchers at DOE's Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley Lab) analyzed the impact of large wind turbines on grid-system value and illustrated the importance of expanding wind turbine design to focus not only on minimizing direct costs, but also on a broader set of factors that impact the value of wind to the electricity grid. Results demonstrate a possible double dividend—that larger rotors (relative to nameplate capacity) and taller towers might not only reduce levelized cost of energy (LCOE) but also enhance the value of wind energy and provide hidden benefits.Berkeley Lab’s new research addresses that expanded design need. Results demonstrate a possible double dividend—that larger rotors (relative to nameplate capacity) and taller towers might not only reduce LCOE but also enhance the value of wind energy and provide hidden benefits.The following is a list of wind energy news from WETO and DOE National Laboratories.The following is a list of wind energy funding opportunities.The following is a curated listing of recent or high-profile publications from WETO and DOE National Laboratories. Visit the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy’s  for research reports, publications, data sets, and online tools developed by National Laboratories and their facilities.Subscribe to learn more about DOE Wind Energy Technologies Office R&D projects, news, accomplishments, and recent publications.