
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Service for Experienced, Rejoiner and Volunteer Engagements (SERVE)
  

  
  

  
    
  Use the SERVE website to discover reserve, re-joiner and wider opportunities in the UK Armed Forces, find forces jobs; and to stay connected with defence.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      24 June 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    SERVE 
    
        https://www.findforcesjobs.mod.gov.uk
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Service for Experienced, Rejoiner and Volunteer Engagements (SERVE) is a free and easy to use website. It can be used by all regular and reserve service personnel, Veterans; and anyone interested in staying connected with defence. 

SERVE modernises the experience of finding opportunities in the armed forces by using technology, which will help to increase the adaptability and sustainability of the military workforce so it can adjust to the demands of defence capabilities whilst delivering greater efficiency and effectiveness.

SERVE advertises Reserve, re-joiner and wider opportunities across all 3 services, including joint organisations, in one place. It is available through any internet-connected device such as a mobile, desktop or tablet.

Users can explore opportunities across the full range of reserve commitment types, from full time reserve service and additional duties commitment, to short-term tasks; along with re-joiner opportunities. Searches can be refined by Service, location, branch/cap badge, rank, engagement type or length, specialism, or any combination of these. Once registered, users can set up notifications, so they receive email alerts when new, relevant, opportunities are posted.

SERVE’s information panels will cover a range of subjects from defence announcements and recruitment campaigns for trade skills, through to signposts to tools and support on other websites.

SERVE will continue to be developed and updated over time to offer users the best experience.




        
      

      
    Published 24 June 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence Commercial Graduate Programme brochure
        Apprenticeships at the Defence Electronics and Components Agency
        UK Reserves
        A history of our reserves

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military recruitment, training and operations

  


  

  


    
  


    