

This toolkit provides guidance to local health departments on engaging with disaster citizen science to support public health preparedness. Regardless of the specific disaster problem, or the size or scope of the intended project, this toolkit should help health departments design and implement disaster citizen science projects and identify resources to support activities.




Read Online

Citizen Science for Disasters
A Guide for Local Health Departments
by Ramya Chari, Sameer M. Siddiqi, Vishnupriya Kareddy, Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers, Jaime Madrigano, Lori Uscher-Pines
Related Topics: Citizen Science, Community Health and Well-Being, Community-Based Participatory Research, Disaster Recovery Operations, Emergency Preparedness, Natural Hazards, Public Health Preparedness
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


6 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










All disasters are local, and health departments form the backbone of response. Scientific research is critical for understanding the characteristics of a disaster, documenting adverse outcomes, and testing strategies for preventing disasters and reducing their harms. Disaster science has typically been performed by professional researchers. But, today, the public has a much bigger role to play. The field of citizen science may hold the key to performing better research and delivering better results for communities everywhere. Citizen science, also sometimes called community science or street science, is public engagement in scientific research as scientists rather than study subjects. When applied to disasters, the field is called disaster citizen science. With the invention of new technologies, scientific knowledge, tools, and methods have become accessible to everyone in ways that did not exist before. By harnessing these advancements, health departments could obtain data that address critical needs to improve preparedness planning, while using an approach that is inherently designed to promote public participation, education, and understanding of science. Everyone benefits.
The authors designed this toolkit to provide guidance to health departments on engaging with disaster citizen science to support public health preparedness. Regardless of the specific disaster problem, or the size or scope of the intended project, the toolkit explains how to carry out a study that results in quality data. Ultimately, this toolkit should help health departments design and implement disaster citizen science projects and identify resources to support activities.

 Related Products 








Tool
Citizen Science for Disasters

Sep 29, 2021
Ramya Chari, Sameer M. Siddiqi @Sameer_Siddiqi, et al.






Table of Contents

Chapter One
Learn: A Primer on Disaster Citizen Science

Chapter Two
Act




Research conducted by

RAND Social and Economic Well-Being



The research described in this report was prepared for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and conducted by the Community Health and Environmental Policy Program within RAND Social and Economic Well-Being.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Tool series. RAND tools may include models, databases, calculators, computer code, GIS mapping tools, practitioner guidelines, web applications, and various toolkits. All RAND tools undergo rigorous peer review to ensure both high data standards and appropriate methodology in keeping with RAND's commitment to quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
Paperback Pages: 132
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/TL-A175-1
Document Number: TL-A175-1
Year: 2021
Series: Tools



Explore
Related Topics

Citizen ScienceCommunity Health and Well-BeingCommunity-Based Participatory ResearchDisaster Recovery OperationsEmergency PreparednessNatural HazardsPublic Health Preparedness

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Chari, Ramya, Sameer M. Siddiqi, Vishnupriya Kareddy, Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers, Jaime Madrigano, and Lori Uscher-Pines, Citizen Science for Disasters: A Guide for Local Health Departments. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TLA175-1.html.
Chari, Ramya, Sameer M. Siddiqi, Vishnupriya Kareddy, Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers, Jaime Madrigano, and Lori Uscher-Pines, Citizen Science for Disasters: A Guide for Local Health Departments, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, TL-A175-1, 2021. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TLA175-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



