Around the world, companies are looking across a deep chasm of uncertainty. The coronavirus outbreak continues to grow globally, destroying lives and livelihoods – with more than  so far. While government interventions have slowed the pace of new cases in affected regions, new hotspots continue to emerge. Aggressive stimulus packages have mitigated some of the economic effects on individuals and companies, but with more than 40 million Americans filing for unemployment benefits and stalled growth in other countries, economic stresses continue to threaten communities.One hundred years ago,  took several unexpected and lethal turns before it subsided two years later. Today, with insufficient testing capacity, a lack of therapies, and no vaccine, the outlook for COVID-19 is also uncertain. For now,  is an effective public health response with some regional virus flare-ups and partially effective interventions, with the economy returning to its pre-crisis level by Q1 2023, though this could change as we learn more.Some of the news is good. Most large companies have coped remarkably well so far, for example. In just a few weeks, they made leaps that might have otherwise taken five years or more, such as spurring more customers to interact with them in digital channels and transforming management processes to a work-from-home model. In large global capability centers, 70 percent of employees were working at home by the end of March and 95 percent a month later. Many CEOs say their teams are now highly productive– but that may be because they are still in crisis mode.Large firms are now planning phased return-to-workplace programs, using a long checklist of actions to balance employee health, financial and social priorities. Even with these efforts, however, social distancing requirements could mean that fewer than a third of staff return to their workplaces this year – and the process could be interrupted by sporadic virus flare-ups, including some in the workplace. South Korea, for example, imposed one of the world’s most stringent testing, contact tracing and quarantine programs, but a resurgence of the coronavirus in the capital after a brief reopening triggered another shutdown of schools and public spaces. Smart institutions, realizing that the situation is dynamic and nuanced, are starting to leverage dozens of granular county-level data sources on , , mobility and other factors to make decisions to reopen dozens or even hundreds of offices, factories, operations centers, branches and stores in the right sequence – and remain ready to adapt to sudden changes in the environment.Forward-thinking institutions, while they take short-term steps to protect lives and livelihoods, are now also . They are rethinking their operating models to boost efficiency, agility and speed in the “next normal,” in which economic pressures may continue and new constraints, such as a lack of foot traffic and limits on public transportation, could slow recovery for some time.Most senior teams, having quickly overcome their doubts about the effectiveness of remote working and decision-making speed, now have a chance to redesign how their companies operate. We expect outperformers to boost productivity significantly faster than usual, as they harness new tools and ways of working and learn from past successes and failures.As they build new models, senior leaders will answer questions in three broad categories: work location and real estate strategy, functional excellence and productivity, and people development & company culture:We expect the organizations that emerge from the pandemic in the strongest positions will be those who reimagine their operating models along four imperatives:This journey will continue until health threats subside, which could take years. On personal and organization levels, the inability to adapt could result in failure. Research shows that even in the best of times, 70 percent of transformation programs fall short of targets. Today, thousands of companies across industries and continents are already enduring a decline in business momentum. Those who cannot reverse this could also see breakdowns in organizational culture.But dynamic institutions will seize this moment to overcome barriers to change, learn from others, and stay flexible in an evolving environment. As they climb out of this unprecedented public health and economic chasm, these winners will emerge stronger on the other side.