
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    MOD Engagement with Trade Associations
  

  
  
  
      
  Information on the different trade associations that defence procurement work alongside. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      29 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        11 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Trade Associations are funded by businesses that operate in a specific industry, and many operate on a not-for-profit basis.  Their activities are focused around enhancing the profile of their industry sector, and include influencing policy debates, driving innovation, and provision of supply chain and business development support (often with a focus on SMEs).

MOD has regular engagement with Trade Associations; details of which can be found below.

Team Defence

Team Defence collaborate securely across the defence enterprise to achieve end-to-end delivery of materiel and services, including support through-life. Team Defence is holistic and includes Users (for example, the MOD, Allies, other government departments and contractors) and Industry suppliers, spanning multinational prime-contractors and niche Small to Medium Enterprises (SMEs), securely collaborating across the defence supply chain and support network.

ADS

ADS represents and supports over 1100 UK businesses operating in the aerospace, defence, security and space sectors. ADS membership ranges from SMEs to global primes.

Farnborough International Limited (FIL), which runs the Farnborough International Airshow, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of ADS Group Ltd.

Make UK

Make UK champions and celebrates British manufacturing and manufacturers. building a platform for the evolution of UK manufacturing.

NDI (part of Make UK) champions and celebrates the UK’s defence & security industry. NDI represent the sector’s interests to government and champion our innovative, global and dynamic industry to the public.

techUK

techUKis the UK’s leading technology membership organisation, with more than 850 members spread across the UK. They are a network that enables members to learn from each other and grow in a way which contributes to the country both socially and economically.

UKspace

UKspace is the trade association of the British space industry, representing and promoting space to government and other key stakeholders nationally and internationally.

Other Trade Associations


  Federation of Small Businesses (FSB)
  Farnborough Aerospace Consortium
  West of England Aerospace Consortium
  North West Aerospace Alliance
  
The British Healthcare Trades Association (BHTA).


Related information

Procurement at MOD





      
        
    Published 29 October 2020
    Last updated 11 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 November 2021
              Addition of link to UKspace.
            
            
              10 February 2021
              Added information about 'Team Defence'.
            
            
              29 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence Procurement COVID-19 communications
        Supply chain opportunities
        Frameworks Agreements
        MOD Procurement: an overview

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Government
        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    