COVID-19: Briefing note #85, December 15, 2021Debriefing 2021 reveals the agenda for the coming year.
        
        
        
     for McKinsey to look back, survey, and publish a variety of “state of” reports. This week, we took a measure of labor, economic opportunity, and education in the United States; examined logistics in India and grocery in China; and analyzed 12 key ways in which the world changed this year. In all regions and sectors, the COVID-19 pandemic shaped the story in 2021, and the recovery helps set priorities for 2022. has pushed private-sector wages to increase at more than double the long-term pre-COVID-19 growth rates, yet positions remain unfilled (exhibit). Some underlying factors are directly related to the impact of the pandemic and may be temporary. But deeper structural shifts could have a longer-lasting impact. Companies seeking labor resilience should learn to measure risk, design bold interventions, and ensure strong executive-level support.
    
 revealed that Americans are aware of the labor market changes: 49 percent of respondents said that most Americans have opportunities to find good jobs, up seven percentage points from March, when we first conducted our survey. Their biggest economic worry, by far, and a prime barrier to sustainable and inclusive growth? Access to healthcare and/or health insurance. is a bleak business: students in majority-Black schools are five months behind where they would otherwise have been, both in math and reading. Students in majority-White schools are now just two months behind historical levels. If current trends persist, historically disadvantaged students could remain up to a grade level behind their peers. Educational systems can invest now to ensure all students have the chance to recover from the pandemic’s many setbacks.The impact of the COVID-19 crisis shows that . In the warehousing function, companies could consider shrinking their product mix, allocating more inventory to essential items, and introducing processes to reduce levels of human contact. In the transport function, key steps include using efficient multimodal transportation more extensively. reveals a paradox: this huge market leads in online commerce and is growing rapidly but is also highly unproductive, with the lowest sales per square meter in the world. The report covers topics including emerging trends that will shape the competitive landscape, the path to profitability for different retail models, and the sweeping impact of changing consumer preferences and technology.In , the  showcases 12 of the most thought-provoking charts from our research over the past year. The rise of the Asian consumer, the changing workplace, and pandemic-era changes that could yield higher productivity are among the topics in focus.No discussion of 2021 would be complete without a debrief on the highlight of the year: the release of the COVID-19 vaccines. On the  podcast,  discusses the decision to put $2 billion of capital at risk and never look at the business case during development. Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
    On , Knut Alicke and Dan Swan, partners in McKinsey’s Operations Practice, describe . They suggest ways executives can build resilience into their supply-chain strategies for when the next major shake-up arrives.
    In  on , 56 percent of respondents report AI adoption in at least one function, up from 50 percent in 2020, with the greatest increases coming from companies in emerging economies. Nearly two-thirds of respondents say their companies’ investments in AI will continue to increase over the next three years.
    Latinos make up 18.4 percent of the US population and 17.3 percent of the US labor force, a share forecast to rise more than 30 percent by 2060. Latinos start more businesses and have higher rates of intergenerational mobility, yet . 
This week, we feature three books in our  series. Simon Mundy, Moral Money editor at the Financial Times, discusses his new book,  (William Collins, January 2022). The book relates the personal tales of people around the world dealing with the effects of climate change. David Schonthal, professor of strategy, innovation, and entrepreneurship at Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Management, discusses his new book,  (Wiley, 2021). Innovators should consider factors including how much energy has to be expended to adopt a new idea and what emotions it brings up in those who interact with it. Rob Cross, the Edward A. Madden Professor of Global Leadership at Babson College, discusses his new work,  (Harvard Business Review Press, 2021). Through roughly 800 interviews with high performers, Cross identifies what makes collaboration effective and what is just a big time-suck.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.

	




    
    

COVID-19: Briefing note #84, December 8, 2021The virus is not the only thing with a talent for transformation.
	
say anything positive about the COVID-19 pandemic—and its latest twist, the Omicron variant—it might be that it forced a lot of people to get better at accepting and acting upon the need for change. This week, we looked at three ways in which business leaders are transforming their organizations, as well as changes reshaping mortgages, infrastructure, healthcare, and the workplace., including difficulty in finding workers and an upward price spiral for goods. The prices for basic commodities including steel, semiconductors, and natural gas have risen, as have container-shipping costs. The need for decarbonization adds a long-term challenge to the total picture. To get ahead of operational difficulties, leaders can set up resilient, risk-tolerant supply-chain structures, double down on digitization (exhibit), and achieve real-time visibility and systematic responses to external developments.
    
Business building is one of the top strategic priorities for organizations—double the share of recent years. That’s because business leaders expect half of their companies’ revenues five years from now to come from products, services, or businesses that do not yet exist, according to the latest  on . This year’s survey provides insights to move organizations up the learning curve faster.McKinsey talked to more than 350 senior executives about their plans for . Of the executives surveyed, 91 percent are planning to maintain or increase investment in digital technology in the coming years. More than half of respondents (compared with just over a quarter last year) said remote working has increased productivity compared with pre-COVID-19 levels. This boost is leading organizations to aspire to an average of 20 percent savings through optimizing real-estate portfolios.Before we go any deeper into the topic of change, let’s admit that it’s not easy. On the  podcast,  for systems and organizations, how to put teams together that can embrace a transformation, and the steps that lead to success.The mortgage industry has been gradually adopting technology to streamline processes. But there is still an , faster, and cheaper, with increased digitization and automation, and through offerings from nonbank lenders, next-generation subservicers, nonqualified mortgage lenders, and companies bundling home-buying services. The December edition of  explores the transformational power of the . The collection includes articles about  to meet changing environmental, social, and governance expectations, and the  and . with comprehensive care models that are expected to eventually lower total medical costs. Parents are transforming the workplace in a way unlikely to please employers: by leaving it.  in how, when, and where they do their jobs.  by ensuring benefits are easy to access and understand, destigmatizing receiving care, and exploring benefits that help with basic needs such as housing and transportation.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
    , with almost 70 percent stating that they were willing to use micromobility vehicles for their commute—though with lots of regional variability. 
     are being developed by a handful of life-sciences companies. IEPs take into account the evidence needs of different functions and geographies across the life cycle of an asset, and then collaboratively determine how to meet them using a broad range of methods and data. 
     in breakthrough life-sciences start-ups. UK biotechs can continue transforming their global impact by leveraging their uniquely data-rich environment and increasing collaboration and collective growth.
    On , McKinsey partner Shelley Stewart III discusses  with housing, healthcare, grocery stores, and brands that fit their needs. 
Our  series features Pulitzer Prize winner and New York Times editorial-board member Farah Stockman. In her book,  (Penguin Random House, October 2021), Stockman follows three workers laid off from manufacturing jobs that provided not only paychecks but also status, meaning, and the basis of connection to American life.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #83, December 1, 2021Part of any recovery is fixing the things that broke. about creating new technology that will help build sustainable and inclusive growth. But this week, McKinsey delved into the less glamorous work of repairing what is hobbled, leaky, or damaged. Time and inertia have eroded the United States’ water system, while the COVID-19 pandemic did a number on global travel in both tourism-dependent regions such as Thailand and emerging markets where tourism is less developed. The  is at an unprecedented level (exhibit). Among other problems, on average, 14 to 18 percent of total daily treated potable water in the United States is lost through leaks. Fortunately, an exciting set of technologies is making it possible to achieve water objectives more efficiently, while the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act includes significantly higher investment in desalination, water conservation, and water recycling. If players across the system are strategic, there is a unique opportunity to prepare the system to be resilient, safe, and affordable for the generations to come.
    
Countries that are heavily dependent on international tourism, such as Thailand, need to mend a revenue crater created by the pandemic. Passenger occupancy on international flights to Thailand dropped by 95 percent in September 2021 compared with the previous year, while hotels only filled 9 percent of their rooms.  by bundling product offerings, promoting ecotourism and cultural tourism, and investing in infrastructure in destinations attractive to domestic tourists, among other options.  Countries where tourism is still being developed face a related, but different, set of repairs. In September 2020, , a real-estate and hospitality multinational, when there was plenty to fix. It was six months into the COVID-19 pandemic, seven months after the sudden passing of the company’s previous CEO, and amid an 84 percent drop in the number of global international tourist arrivals. In an interview with McKinsey, Hamamsy discusses the unique challenges of managing the company’s properties located in emerging markets.Here is some of this week’s other research:
    
    
    
    
Our   series features Wil Haygood, a journalist and Boadway Visiting Distinguished Scholar at Miami University. His new book  (Alfred A. Knopf, October 2021) examines a century of Black cinema history and the insights it offers into Black culture and civil rights in the United States. This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #82, November 24, 2021The COVID-19 pandemic locked us down, but in the future, we aim to fly. of lockdowns, travel bans, and at-home school and work, there’s some poetic justice in the robust development of advanced air mobility. The industry, which includes more than 250 companies developing electric vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) aircraft, attracted more than $5.4 billion in investment in just the first nine months of 2021. By 2030, thousands of eVTOLs could be flying above cities, delivering both cargo and passengers (exhibit). , where technology stands now, how it could play out, and what it means for the future of cities and society.
    
Three CEOs shared their companies’ visions for air mobility.  about the multirotor eVTOL two-seater aircraft his company plans to offer for commercial use in 2024.   and how they commute and travel. Joby’s eVTOL aircraft seats five people—a pilot and four passengers—and can travel at speeds of up to 200 miles per hour. And  to minimize noise emissions—something he believes will be crucial to community acceptance—and with electric and battery power for sustainability.
It can be hard to imagine a future of easy, cheap, and fast transportation when today the world’s containers are stuck in an expensive holding pattern. In a follow-up to their August video about why shipping costs skyrocketed during the COVID-19 pandemic,  and at what level, identify challenges that may prolong the record costs, and explain how the Chinese New Year next February may affect shipping rates.
 globally to learn what steps they had taken to shore up their supply chains over the past year. Among key findings: companies were more likely than expected to increase inventories, and less likely either to diversify supply bases or to implement nearshoring or regionalization strategies.
 platform, has seen a big shift toward travel domestically and to neighboring countries. In an interview with McKinsey, he describes how it could take years for the industry to rebuild trust in the idea that intercontinental travel is a low-risk activity.
Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:

     would enable the energy system to function smoothly with a large share of power coming from renewables and would make a substantial contribution to decarbonizing the power sector fully by 2040.
    In this episode of , Mona Mourshed, global founder and CEO of Generation, discusses . Weirdly, managers tend to rate their older workers high, but are reluctant to hire them. 
    They play an increasingly important role in global trade, but micro, small, and medium-size enterprises . Trade finance needs an architecture of common standards and best practices to become more inclusive, collaborative, and digitized. 
Here’s something to discuss around the Thanksgiving table: our new edition of  starts with the mess scattered around a typical kid’s bedroom and ends in Asia, where K-pop is influencing the world’s popular culture. What ties it all together? . We go back to ancient Mesopotamia, through the Industrial Revolution, and onto container ships to explain why and how the socks on your floor, the songs on your playlist, and the food in your lunch box come from all over the world.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #81, November 17, 2021It’s time to set priorities for the next era. McKinsey delved into priority setting, starting with ideas about how the wealth of ten top economies might be put to more productive use. We continued exploring what’s most important now with a breakdown of what the United States intends to tackle with its new $1.2 trillion infrastructure bill and in articles about COP26, M&A trends, and corporate responsibilities. We also reached outside our sphere, querying dozens of journalists about what they view as the top stories of our time.McKinsey took stock of the underlying health and resilience of the global economy as it begins to rebound from the COVID-19 pandemic and questioned . Asset values in ten major economies are now nearly 50 percent higher than the long-run average relative to income. From 2000 to 2020, for every $1 of net new investment, twice as much debt and four times as many liabilities have been created (exhibit). Historically, the growth of net worth has largely reflected investments that drive productivity and growth, in addition to inflation. Over the past two decades, however, increases in asset prices—driven largely by soaring real-estate prices—made up 77 percent of net-worth growth. 
    
The first article in our new series, , breaks , signed into law this week. The act allocates an estimated $1.2 trillion in total funding over ten years, including $550 billion in new spending during the next five, divided between improving the surface-transportation network ($284 billion) and society’s core infrastructure ($266 billion). was that the net-zero imperative is no longer in question—it has become an organizing principle for business. McKinsey analysis indicates that a net-zero transition would require $150 trillion of capital spending, two-thirds of it in developing economies. Net-zero commitments are outpacing the formation of supply chains, market mechanisms, and financing models. We propose five considerations that can help executives define an effective net-zero program for the next few years. M&A deal value was up 175 percent from a year earlier for large transactions, according to . By the end of August, the value of large global M&A transactions had already surpassed $3.9 trillion, making the $4.5 trillion record set in 2007 appear within reach. The continued high premiums make extracting greater value from transactions more important than ever. Private-equity firms are increasingly prioritizing full-fledged business building, and corporate players are working harder—and sometimes paying more—to find hidden jewels.In this episode of the  podcast, two authors of a new  report examine how . Between 1995 and 2018, the contribution of large corporations to their home countries’ economies rose by ten percentage points in terms of share of GDP. But those corporations are relying less and less on assets and labor—less physical capital and fewer employees per unit of revenue—which raises a wide set of questions.We know what we think the big topics will be in the coming year, but we wanted to learn what members of the media consider most significant. . First, what business, economics, or policy theme do they predict will dominate media in 2022? And second, what topic do they think will be under covered, and why does it merit more attention? Our interactive presentation lets our audience choose which journalists or publications they want to hear from. Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
     with six key insights from our research on EV profitability. The full report is available upon request from .
    Automation, connectivity, and electrification will have profound effects on . McKinsey examines considerations for OEMs and suppliers as vehicle interiors evolve.
    Most companies lack the tools to effectively manage . Five steps can help create a better understanding of automation risk and how to handle it.
    A yearlong research collaboration between McKinsey and Exemplars in Global Health identifies factors that can drive widescale implementation of .
    Amid COVID-19-era supply-chain disruptions,  that is flexible, fast, sustainable, digitally enhanced, and consumer-centric. Four key strategies can accelerate success.
Our  features Giulio Boccaletti, honorary research associate at the Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford, and a former McKinsey partner. He discusses his new book,  (Pantheon, September 2021), which examines how societies throughout history have managed water resources and what the institutions that protect us from water events can learn from the past.Our new edition of  starts with the mess scattered around a typical kid’s bedroom and ends in Asia, where K-pop is influencing the world’s popular culture. What ties it all together? . We go back to ancient Mesopotamia, through the Industrial Revolution, and onto container ships to explain why and how the socks on your floor, the songs on your playlist, and the food in your lunch box come from all over the world.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #80, November 10, 2021Bouncing back higher requires tackling underlying obstacles.McKinsey continued its exploration into how to grow economies sustainably and inclusively by focusing on the United States, its regions, and specific programs. We also examined the global fight against climate change in interviews with the authors of two books on the topic and with an article on building resilience.   if it can address issues including the struggles of young people, who are building wealth at a much slower pace than their peers did half a century ago, and large gaps in workforce participation, wages, and higher-education attainment (exhibit). Other challenges include climate change, which is affecting people in different geographies in the United States in various ways, and slower productivity growth. McKinsey proposes a series of no-regrets actions to create the conditions for economic growth that mitigates climate change and benefits a wide swath of the population.
    
Though the region enjoys a strong economy and lower unemployment than the national average, . Median Black household income is less than half the median White household income ($42,200 compared with $90,100, respectively), and workers of color were one and a half to two times likelier to report loss of income during the pandemic. To address root causes of inequities, leaders can increase access to capital for entrepreneurs, eliminate policies and practices that result in bias and exclusion, expand mentorship, and support the reskilling of workers. , intended to help homeowners avoid defaults and delinquencies through assistance with mortgage, insurance, and utility payments. A well-designed strategy to gather and analyze data will help states support homeowners most at risk. Going further to build dynamic models of the impact of different decisions and scenarios can also help states test various potential policies.This week, we spoke with three authors for our  series, two of whom tackle climate change. Katharine Hayhoe, chief scientist for The Nature Conservancy, discusses her new book,  (Simon & Schuster, September 2021). Hayhoe examines the facts of climate change and suggests personal and policy changes that can improve the situation.In his new book,  (Penguin Random House, November 2021), John Doerr, investor and chairman of venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins, highlights ten big, global objectives by which we can cut carbon emissions. These include how we electrify transportation, decarbonize the grid, and manufacture concrete and steel.Even in a scenario in which aggressive decarbonization results in just 1.5°C of warming above preindustrial levels by 2050, the number of people exposed to severe climate hazards could still increase to a quarter of the global population.  into their plans. Insurance, civil-engineering, agricultural, and financial-services companies all have roles to play in encouraging and enabling investment in sustainability and resilience.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
    The global economy is exhibiting strong overall demand, according to  for October. The public-health situation has improved in most surveyed economies, especially as COVID-19 vaccination programs make real progress. The main economic challenges are supply-chain bottlenecks and rising inflation. Fortunately, most economists and forecasting institutions expect that these difficulties will be relatively short lived. 
    In McKinsey’s new report, , we estimate that by 2030, the IoT could enable $5.5 trillion to $12.6 trillion in value globally. We found that the factory setting will account for the largest amount of potential economic value from the IoT, about 26 percent, in 2030. The human-health setting is second, representing about 10 to 14 percent of estimated value in 2030.
     is a seasoned software executive who serves on the boards of companies including Five9, Box, and NortonLifeLock. In a wide-ranging interview, she discusses product–market fit, why unit economics always matters, and what’s making her optimistic about board diversity. 
Our new edition of  starts with the mess scattered around a typical kid’s bedroom and ends in Asia where K-pop is influencing the world’s popular culture. What ties it all together? . We go back to ancient Mesopotamia, through the Industrial Revolution, and onto container ships to explain why and how the socks on your floor, the songs on your playlist, and the food in your lunch box come from all over the world.Our third  features Azeem Azhar, creator of the Exponential View newsletter, on his new book,  (Diversion Books, September 2021), which in the United Kingdom is titled Exponential: How to Bridge the Gap Between Technology and Society (Random House Business, September 2021). Azhar hopes the book will serve as a road map for how societies can deal with the effects of AI, automation, and big data.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #79, November 3, 2021Endemic COVID-19 is one more problem we’ll have to live with.dream about putting the COVID-19 genie back in the bottle, but the more likely reality is that the virus will become an endemic problem we just have to get used to. Climate change is similar in some ways: a difficulty we have to plan for, deal with, and overcome every day. This week, McKinsey proposes multiple approaches to these and other ongoing struggles.Soon, the daily risks we run with COVID-19 may seem as much a part of normal daily life as the risks we run when we drive or navigate flu season.  first requires society to reach a consensus on what is an acceptable disease burden. We will then need a comprehensive approach to track progress against this standard, define new disease-management protocols to limit deaths, and establish practices to slow transmission.Underscoring how the virus is morphing into an endemic concern, our latest report on  revealed that uncertainty over COVID-19 is no longer executives’ foremost economic worry. Instead, they perceive the mounting fallout on the supply chain and inflation as the biggest threats to growth in their companies and economies (exhibit).
    
 and measure progress. These tools use forward-looking climate scenarios to estimate the division of the global carbon budget by sector and geography. This allows financial institutions the freedom to extend financing to heavy emitters, provided that the financing goes toward the responsible retirement or decarbonization of emitting assets and that decarbonization or retirement is successfully achieved.  that are already mature could deliver about 60 percent of the emissions abatement needed by 2050. But further abatement must come from climate technologies that aren’t quite ready. Our estimates suggest that next-generation technologies could attract $1.5 trillion to $2 trillion of capital investment per year by 2025. Established companies, start-ups, and investors will need a nuanced understanding of technical advances, customer demands, and policy environments.Carbon markets have become increasingly fundamental to achieving net-zero greenhouse-gas emissions. A joint paper by McKinsey and research partners in Singapore discusses the rapid emergence of carbon markets as a viable asset class.  to achieve global climate goals while also fulfilling their own mandates.  If Africa can use its large renewable-energy-generation capacity and rich natural capital endowments strategically, it could catalyze economic growth and make a substantial contribution to the global net-zero transition.  highlights ten opportunities that could deliver growth, boost resilience, and abate emissions on the continent.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research: 
    Global ambition, significant funding, the scale and pace of reforms, the talent supply, and the healthcare opportunity are galvanizing . The country’s emergence as a new source of innovation is good news for a global biopharma industry facing intense pressure on R&D productivity. 
     while new patterns of consumption will transform opportunities in the region. Consumers may adopt new behaviors such as considering new forms of ownership, increasing eco-consciousness, and changing brand preferences. 
    Feeling peckish? You’re in good company. This episode of the  features . The executive describes the snacking habits of various nations and digital strategies that let consumers print their own pictures on M&M candies.
Our  series features former McKinsey consultant David McCloskey on his debut novel,  (W. W. Norton & Company, October 2021). The novel was inspired by the author’s pre-McKinsey career as an analyst with the CIA, when he worked in field stations across the Middle East and focused on Iraq, Lebanon, and Syria, and counterterrorism issues.Also in Author Talks,  Paul Polman, the cofounder and chair of IMAGINE and former CEO of Unilever, discusses his book  (Harvard Business Review Press, October 2021). Leadership and systems changes are needed so that businesses can focus on being successful by solving the world’s problems.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #78, October 27, 2021How can the world deliver growth and sustainability and inclusion? near-term obstacles that affect the organizations we serve, as in this week’s collection of articles about a distressing aftershock of the COVID-19 pandemic: inflation. But this week, we also offer an expansive reflection by McKinsey’s leadership on a vision for the future.How do we go about building ? McKinsey’s global managing partner Bob Sternfels and colleagues Tracy Francis, Anu Madgavkar, and Sven Smit deliver a proposal for how changemakers in business, government, and society can forge such a path. First and foremost, the three goals cannot be viewed as trade-offs but rather as fundamentals that strengthen and reinforce one another (exhibit).
    
McKinsey recently examined inflation from several angles. The COVID-19 pandemic has driven radical shifts in demand, buying patterns, and perceived value across value chains, which in turn have led to sharp spikes in commodity prices. While procurement teams should continue efforts to fight material-cost increases and creatively reduce sourcing costs,  to improve margin position and align the prices of a wide range of industrial goods with their value to customers. Pandemic price spikes and commodity cost increases are concerns for many business leaders, but . To get clarity on how price increases have affected their profit-and-loss statements, CFOs first have to ask the right questions about market dynamics, financial performance, and leadership incentives. Swift action to mitigate the effects of price spikes is often essential because it takes time for benefits to materialize.After a decade of defense-spending growth, . The budget isn’t the only thing that is changing. Defense leaders have renewed interest in adopting innovative technologies, such as quantum computing, artificial intelligence, and hypersonic weapons. Balancing the budget will require a new cost-reduction approach that sets market-backed targets across all areas. Bathroom tissue may not be a glamorous topic, but it’s an effective bellwether of consumer sentiment, as panic buying during the outset of the pandemic illustrated. Today,  point to larger consumer themes, including the need to be e-commerce ready and sustainable. Rising inflation is expected to fuel demand for private-label and lower-cost products. Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
    The number of public-company listings in the United States peaked in the mid-1990s, at nearly 6,000, but has fallen by about half over the past 20 years. While pundits worry, our analysis shows that . 
    As businesses emerge from the pandemic, more than 80 percent face critical skills gaps. In these new circumstances, we believe  can be central to an organization’s strategy for improving capabilities.
    Dwindling supplies of fresh water pose a material business risk: one estimate shows that the lack of clean fresh water threatens some $425 billion of value across more than 500 companies.  by targeting renewable-energy purchases and investments.
It’s not for goofing off; it’s for sharpening your problem-solving skills. What nine-letter word are we searching for? “Crossword,” of course—as in . Each puzzle is created with the McKinsey reader in mind and includes a business theme (of varying degrees of subtlety) for you to noodle over.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #77, October 20, 2021Within regional stories lie universal postpandemic themes.McKinsey experts examined the Asian postpandemic economy and looked into other regional issues including trends reshaping Europe’s power markets, how the United States can decarbonize its power system by 2035, and Germany’s journey toward net zero. Within these deep dives in specific regions are global lessons, including the need to massively accelerate renewable energy generation and to truly understand the digital-native consumer.Two years since McKinsey labeled this  and in the wake of the extraordinary shock of COVID-19, the region is exhibiting remarkable resilience. The Asian economy contracted by 1.5 percent in 2020, while the world economy shrank by 3.2 percent; Asia is expected to rebound faster both this year and next.  include leveraging regional trade networks, boosting growth through innovation and productivity, putting climate change at the top of the corporate and policy agenda, and serving a changing consumer sector. have entered a period of unprecedented change. Power prices have risen to about four times the historical average in a number of European countries. More uncertainty lies ahead: electricity demand is expected to increase steadily in Europe, due in part to electrification of transport (exhibit). A future energy system dominated by intermittent renewable power raises questions about total-capacity rollout. When utilities and large power buyers face such question marks, strategic risk management becomes a matter of survival.
    
In April 2021, the United States set a target to create a “carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035.”  in which each regional power market would reach net-zero greenhouse-gas emissions without offsets from other sectors., though daunting. Our research shows that the transformation to net-zero emissions can be achieved at net-zero cost for society as a whole, delivering a favorable business case for Germany and a leap to a new technological age. Germany has to tackle key challenges in the five most emissions-intensive sectors: energy, industry, transportation, buildings, and agriculture.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
    Traditionally, earnings per share is viewed as a major driver of returns to shareholders. But our historical and updated analyses point to  of corporate performance. McKinsey experts explain why investors should examine a company’s total profit after the cost of capital is subtracted.
    COVID-19 forced colleges and universities worldwide into online education.  by surveying academic research as well as the reported practices of more than 30 institutions, and by conducting ethnographic market research. Vital building blocks include creating a seamless journey for students (single sign-on is key), adopting an engaging approach to teaching, and facilitating interpersonal connections.
     have seen high double-digit returns throughout the pandemic, despite supply-chain issues and growing divergence in global trade. To keep the momentum going, semiconductor players might want to consider focusing on gaining leadership in profitable segments by leveraging M&A and partnerships, building agility, and pursuing new technologies and innovations. 
    COVID-19 has been hard on fashion: apparel companies lost more than 90 percent of their profits in 2020, according to the .  to unlock the insights needed to reengage customers in the coming months and years.
Our  series features Emory University law professor Dorothy A. Brown, a nationally recognized scholar on race, class, and tax policy, about her latest book,  (Crown, March 2021). US tax policy often favors behaviors and activities more common among White households, putting Black taxpayers at a disadvantage.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #76, October 13, 2021The drama of COVID-19 has cast leaders in new roles. but the COVID-19 pandemic has rewritten the script. Executives are now asked to play different parts. This week, McKinsey looked at the morphing demands on CFOs and asset managers, and at how C-suite leaders across industries must understand and embrace digitally enabled strategies and business models. has been transformed by the pandemic, according to the latest . Crisis management, social and environmental issues, and the accelerated adoption of technology are occupying time previously devoted to strategic leadership and finance capabilities. Between 2016 and 2021, the share of finance leaders who say that they are responsible for their companies’ digital activities has more than tripled. Procurement, board engagement, and investor relations are also newly important focuses for CFOs (exhibit).
    
We’re all tech executives now, to some extent. Across industries,  and technology endowment, more agile delivery, and a progressively more tech-savvy C-suite. To better understand , we looked at how their workforce is configured, on three dimensions: spending, roles, and talent. Banks that have reconfigured all three have achieved a significant uptick in output from their technology budgets.  and analytical capability to accelerate productivity. CPG companies must also unravel the conundrum of e-commerce, which offers a growth channel but not necessarily a profitable one. On the  podcast, McKinsey’s Lidiya Chapple and Tatiana Sivaeva explain ., whose industry profits reached close to $73 billion in 2020, highlights ways in which the industry’s role is changing. Investors increasingly want their asset managers to expose them to opportunities outside of traditional asset classes and industry sectors. Asset managers are getting more help from technology-enabled mass customization, which can broaden access to value propositions that have typically been the preserve of institutional and high-net-worth investors.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our research:
    Cultivated meat is a cutting-edge food that is just beginning to be produced at commercial levels. In a , McKinsey and industry experts offer insights into what it is, how it is made, and how it can scale to become a global industry. 
     revealed that rapid growth and strong demand are bumping against pandemic-related disruptions. Energy prices have surged, but long-term inflation expectations remain moderate.
    . Their lower sense of financial security underscores the importance of holistic care for behavioral health—not just treating mental illness symptoms but considering the broader needs an individual with mental illness may have.
    A corporate spin-off can liberate a parent company and a divested business unit from capital and bureaucratic constraints, so they can pursue strategies they couldn’t otherwise. Our , as well as our experience in the field, point to four critical factors.
Our   series features Indra Nooyi, former chairman and CEO of PepsiCo, about her new book  (Penguin Random House, September 2021). Reflecting on her own experience, the first woman of color and immigrant to run a Fortune 50 company argues that winning the war for talent requires creating a new system in which women can both manage their families and climb to the top at work.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #75, October 6, 2021Some problems are relentless and call for an unrelenting response. drags on, executives, particularly in developed economies, are feeling worse about the state of the economy and their own companies’ prospects. It’s natural that a challenge as unremitting as the pandemic should produce alternating hope and despair. This week, McKinsey examined the backslide in executives’ views, and a variety of similar issues that require problem-solving as dogged as the problems themselves, including vaccine development, transport decarbonization, employee needs, and the extraterrestrial junkyard.Just as the rise of the Delta variant ushered in a fresh wave of COVID-19 cases, so it appears to have resuscitated . In our latest , 65 percent of respondents say that they expect improvements in their home economies, down from a range of 73 to 79 percent who have said so since March 2021. By region, the pandemic is the top risk to growth in every region except Latin America and cited most often by those in developing markets and Asia–Pacific (exhibit). 
    
In , or CEPI, discusses the work of the largest vaccine-development initiative focused on viruses that are potential epidemic threats. Among other big challenges, there is still work to be done to optimize existing COVID-19 vaccines. CEPI is evaluating mix-and-match dose strategies, where first and second doses could be from different manufacturers, to improve the performance, as well as fractionated, or dose-sparing strategies, to boost coverage.   The organization is also examining the optimal intervals between doses and whether two or three doses are required.? Globally, more than $2 trillion of transport infrastructure investments will be needed each year until 2040 to fuel economic development. The transport sector is the largest contributor of greenhouse-gas emissions within the European Union, and emissions are still growing. McKinsey’s road map lays out changes needed in planning, design, tender, procurement, and operations that can help the industry forge a more sustainable path forward.What do workers want? Our research is clear: workers are hungry for purpose, to feel their work is valued, and their opportunities are growing, all in a comfortable physical and digital environment with the right work–life balance. , but organizations may need to profoundly reorient themselves away from a traditional top-down model to one based on the fundamentals of design thinking. . About 11,000 satellites have been launched since Sputnik 1 in 1957. In the next few years, roughly 70,000 satellites could enter orbit if proposed plans come to fruition—an explosion of interest based on potential new markets and more sophisticated technologies. Unless actively deorbited, they will remain there for months to hundreds of years.  examines how to handle the four main types of extraterrestrial trash.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    It’s not science fiction; it’s the tech-enabled insurance industry of the future. In auto insurance, risk will shift from drivers to the artificial intelligence and software behind self-driving cars. Satellites, drones, and real-time data sets will give insurers unprecedented visibility into risk. As part of our research into the , McKinsey explored their impact on insurance and which five are poised to .
    McKinsey analyzed , examining how various approaches have shaped the development of digital banking.
    On the , Obi Ezekoye, a leader in the Strategy & Corporate Finance Practice, Anthony Luu, an expert in M&A and strategy transformations, and Andy West, the global coleader of McKinsey’s M&A Practice, discuss why , and often make them too late.
Our  series features Parag Khanna, founder and managing partner of FutureMap, speaking about his book  (Simon & Schuster, October 2021). The globalization scholar discusses the migration patterns he expects will occur over the next ten to 30 years and how societies should prepare.
This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #74, September 29, 2021To address vaccine hesitancy, first comprehend it. to solving a problem is to understand it. That’s one of the keys to getting at least some unvaccinated Americans to take action. This week, McKinsey examined vaccine hesitancy and identified some of the reasons for resistance, which, once removed, could help build a bridge to herd immunity. McKinsey experts used this same problem-defining approach to examine how to improve women’s work lives, reduce methane emissions, make organizational transformations more effective, and drive revenue in meal delivery.More than 63 percent of the US population have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and more than 54 percent have been fully vaccinated, as of September 16, 2021.  for the country to have a chance at reaching herd immunity. Among the unvaccinated, 14 percent are “Unlikely adopters,” who may never take the shot, while 7 percent are “Interested,” meaning that they plan on getting the vaccine. The most dynamic unvaccinated group is the “Cautious” category, people who may get vaccinated if their concerns can be addressed (exhibit). Aiding in scheduling appointments, as well as addressing worries about long-term side effects, could help move this group into the vaccinated category.
    
 reflects experiences from 423 participating organizations and more than 65,000 survey respondents. In spite of the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on the workplace, women’s representation has improved across the corporate pipeline since 2016, but there are also persistent gaps. Women of color continue to lose ground at every step: between the entry level and the C-suite, their representation drops off by more than 75 percent. In the past year, one in three women has considered leaving the workforce or downshifting their career—a significant increase from one in four in the first few months of the pandemic. Companies need to take bold steps to address burnout and to recognize and reward the women leaders who are driving progress.  from agriculture, oil and gas, coal mining, solid-waste management, and wastewater management will be critical to solving the net-zero equation. New McKinsey research shows that these five industries could achieve a 20 percent reduction in global annual methane emissions by 2030 and a 46 percent reduction by 2050—enough for a significant shift toward a 1.5°C warming pathway. McKinsey proposes three “no regrets” actions to begin reducing methane emissions now.As leaders steer organizations out of the COVID-19 pandemic, many are recognizing the need for transformation. The question is, ? McKinsey analyzed data from 60 organizations that are at least two years into their transformations and discovered the bare minimum: at least 7 percent of employees should own some part of the change project. That may seem low, but the average company involves only 2 percent of its employees., having more than tripled since 2017. McKinsey identifies the most promising revenue models, which include “dark kitchens,” customer-specific menu engineering, and brand spin-offs.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    Increasingly, private-equity (PE) firms are closely managing the companies they own. To run these portfolio companies, they are choosing CEOs who understand the higher metabolic rate that PE requires. McKinsey, along with top PE executives, created a  that provides insight, guidance, and a series of steps to take control of this demanding leadership challenge.
    . Everyone from sales staff to maintenance workers will need training to work with this technology. McKinsey’s confidence in the segment comes from impressive sales numbers, despite the COVID-19 pandemic: Europe and China achieved fourth-quarter 2020 sales increases of 60 percent and 80 percent, respectively, over the previous quarter. In the United States, EV sales increased nearly 200 percent between the second quarter 2020 and the second quarter 2021.
Even the most seasoned professional was a neophyte at some point, a fact celebrated in our  video series, in which McKinsey colleagues discuss the first time they had to deal with a particular challenge. This edition features stories about the nerve-racking process of giving a colleague tough feedback for the first time, and the humbling experience of receiving it. This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #73, September 22, 2021COVID-19 vaccines demonstrate how to achieve the impossible.  vaccine hesitancy, herd immunity—these have become topics that occupy our everyday thoughts. It can be jarring to remember that less than a year ago, nobody, outside of clinical-trial volunteers, could get a shot at all. How the world got from there to here in record time is the story of achieving an impossible goal. This week, McKinsey explored how Pfizer’s leadership team took on a challenge that they initially believed was undoable. We also examined other difficult feats, including delivering sustainable infrastructure, making electric vehicles (EVs) profitable, and adapting to climate change, and contemplated steps to achieving them.If you want to leave the meeting room, first make a decision. That was one of the systems Pfizer developed to advance its apparently impossible agenda of distributing a vaccine in eight months, said . This interview is part of , a series that includes a broad array of voices leading the historic global effort to develop, distribute, and provide equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines, including the Africa CDC; CEPI; Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance; and Moderna.As illustrated by our  vaccination has helped countries dramatically reduce the rate of hospitalization due to COVID-19 (exhibit), among other benefits. Now Pfizer is focusing on the next big vaccine challenges, including shots for younger kids, heartier formulations, and doses that can manage new variants.  
    
The September edition of  features four articles that explore how leaders are tackling the seemingly insurmountable task of building sustainable infrastructure and retrofitting existing assets. , discusses some of the most exciting investment cases for sustainable infrastructure, including floating solar and floating wind turbines, as well as offshore wind.  and head of the UK government’s Project Delivery Function, identify top concerns for the construction industry. These include prioritizing whole-life carbon measurement and scaling up the capacity to retrofit existing social infrastructure and housing to improve energy efficiency. Densely packed urban residents are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. McKinsey Sustainability and C40 Cities—a network of 97 global cities dedicated to addressing climate change—offer . Finally, solving problems requires first understanding them completely. Help us develop a consistent set of sustainability metrics by answering .Despite growing sales, EV profitability is only slightly above breakeven for many auto makers. McKinsey research is clear that the , so figuring out how to make it profitable is essential to both OEMs’ business models and the decarbonization of the transportation system. .Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    , but leaders face significant challenges migrating their systems and activities from on-premises to the cloud. McKinsey proposes three key actions to help guide the cloud adoption journey. Our  illustrates the potential financial impact of a migration.
    Data, properly protected and used, can simplify delivery of public services, reduce fraud and human error, and catalyze massive operational efficiencies. McKinsey suggests .
    As a share of GDP, industrial manufacturing in the United States has been falling for decades. But  amid a shift toward end-to-end market demand.
Our  series features Ella Bell Smith, a professor of management at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College. She discusses her re-released book,  (Harvard Business Review Press, August 2021). She makes a case for why companies need to spend more on developing Black women to take on senior roles and why women in general should seek out revenue-generating positions. Even the most seasoned professional was a neophyte at some point, a fact celebrated in our  video series, in which McKinsey colleagues discuss the first time they had deal with a particular challenge. The latest edition features stories about the nerve-wracking process of giving a colleague tough feedback for the first time, and the humbling experience of receiving it.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #72, September 15, 2021To reach the post-COVID-19 era, vaccine supply chains must improve. the first COVID-19 mass vaccination program began, only 1.4 percent of people in low-income countries have received at least one dose. The problem is not just of procurement, but also of distribution and the lack of strong cold-chain infrastructure in some parts of the world. Solving these problems is the only way to get from where we are now to the post-COVID-19 era. Once the vaccination challenge—and the pandemic itself—has been overcome, CEOs will face a new set of priorities, which our experts defined this week. We also explored mindsets and skills, including automating, partnering, and developing and supporting diverse talent, that will be crucial for future leaders.Each of the COVID-19 vaccines has a different profile, but they all have one thing in common:  (exhibit). Broadly speaking, developing countries have less mature cold-chain systems than do high-income economies, with various degrees of maturity within them. Procuring vaccines will not be enough to vaccinate the world: cold-chain systems need investment and improvement to get doses into arms effectively. 
    
As promised last week, McKinsey senior partner Homayoun Hatami and global leader Liz Hilton Segel offer an. To prepare for the post-COVID-19 era, leaders need to do more than fine-tune their day-to-day tasks; they need to be ready and willing to rethink how they operate, and even why they exist. In the future, CEOs must be proactive on sustainability, know how to derive value from cloud computing, focus on cultivating talent, design organizations for speed, and communicate purpose across their organizations.Energy companies face societal pressure and increased regulation to significantly reduce fossil-fuel dependency. Leaders in the sector should consider a promising solution: . Such future plants link technology, data, and advanced visualizations with operations to ensure that assets learn from each action taken, as well as from historical data and derived insights. These plants progressively improve their operations over time to run with a lower carbon footprint as well as more safely and profitably.To improve the track record of , government policy makers can align with the private sector to better manage the risks of undertaking a large project. Transferring specific project risks and responsibilities—including development, construction, and operation—to private-sector investors and lenders leverages the risk-management capabilities of the private sector, while the public sector often remains the project’s legal owner.US business leaders face a moral and economic imperative at the societal level: to . Poor health costs the US economy about $3.2 trillion annually from premature deaths and lost productivity. Compared with high-income peer countries, the United States has a 46 to 50 percent higher disease burden rate for 20- to 40-year-old workers, and a 17 to 33 percent higher disease burden rate for those over 40 years old. Employers can consider a suite of changes to improve employee health and productivity. workers? A global survey with more than 1,000 respondents examined the diversity problem within mining, where only 8 to 17 percent of the workforce is female, the gender pay gap is large, and the rate of women who ascend from entry level to executive ranks is low. Leaders who want to fix the problem should set parity goals, cultivate potential employees from colleges and even high schools, and create “buddy” and “sponsor” programs that provide support.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    Like streaming music or driving electric cars, eating cultivated meat—grown in a bioreactor rather than in an animal’s body—may eventually seem totally normal, says . 
    On the , Howard Ungerleider, president and CFO of Dow, describes his role in executing  in 2017 and their subsequent split into three separate companies. The highly complex transaction, which took four years, transformed the chemical industry landscape.
    When , Australia’s largest domestic gas supplier, first took the top job in 2016, he realized that the company needed to break its boom-and-bust cycle with a new business model. He divested noncore assets and set a break-even oil price as a consistent metric to generate free cash flow through the cycle. This article explores lessons companies can derive from Santos’s successful turnaround.
Even the most seasoned professional was a neophyte at some point, a fact celebrated in our , in which McKinsey colleagues discuss the first time they had to deal with a particular challenge. This edition features stories about the nerve-racking process of giving a colleague tough feedback for the first time, and the humbling experience of receiving it.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #71, September 8, 2021What will be the top priorities in the next normal?As companies and industries plan for life after the COVID-19 pandemic, one of the trickiest tasks will be to identify a new set of priorities. Throughout this crisis, coping and keeping up with the ever-shifting situation have taken precedence. But a contagious virus will not always be the top concern for organizations, and other urgent issues, including sustainability, cloud computing, and competition for talent, will require top-of-mind focus. This week, McKinsey examined how leaders can identify and address what matters most in the postpandemic world.In the wake of COVID-19, a top priority for many companies has been to address talent questions, including how to optimize hybrid teams, attract and retain workers with needed capabilities, and make the most of scarce skills. Forward-looking organizations are choosing , which create pools of resources that can be deployed flexibly and on demand. These pools are formed based on similarity of skills, rather than similarity of business functions, making it easier for organizations to access the right skills when they need them (exhibit). 
    
 According to a recent McKinsey analysis, location is today’s biggest factor, accounting for about 65 percent of the standard deviation in price to book. Banks that choose to prioritize location should consider looking for investments and acquisitions that expose them to flourishing markets. In expanding markets, they should consider prioritizing high-demand products and services and profitable customer segments.To operate efficiently and support their organizations’ missions, : defining their functional purpose clearly, preparing for both a changing legal ecosystem and a new wave of corporate litigation, and competing for talent with law firms and the public sector.Next week, watch for McKinsey senior partner Homayoun Hatami and global leader Liz Hilton Segel offering a deep dive into the five immediate priorities for CEOs now. Imperatives include centering strategy around sustainability and making the most of the cloud-computing revolution.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    . The $1 trillion per-year global market for IT service providers is projected to grow by more than 6 percent per year in 2021 and 2022, more quickly than global GDP.
     that hamper growth and long-term success. These include deferring focus and investment in operations and channel management and designing technology platforms for short-term goals, such as launches, instead of the long game.   
    . New regulatory targets in the European Union and the United States now aim for an electric-vehicle (EV) share of at least 50 percent by 2030, and several countries have announced accelerated timelines for sales bans on internal-combustion-engine vehicles in 2030 or 2035. Increasing consumer appetite and improved technology are making EVs ever more popular and viable.
In a new edition of our  series, Vanessa Bohns, a professor of organizational behavior at Cornell University, discusses her book,  (W. W. Norton, September 2021). People often have more impact on others than they realize, so learning how to use that power can be more important than focusing on acquiring more influence. Our latest edition of  is designed to help 18-year-olds (or so) explore automation and the future of work (heads-up: there could be robots involved). Our “find your fit” mini quiz suggests a few occupations that a kid might consider.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #70, September 1, 2021How high can industries bounce back? was unspooling, many in various industries asked themselves, “How bad can it get?” Now that some recoveries are under way, leaders are increasingly wondering how good, how high, and how long the postcrisis bounce will be. This week, McKinsey examined the global recovery in car sales and discussed with Moderna’s chief executive why developing the COVID-19 vaccine may lead to a robust era of drug discovery. Consumer-sector and bank executives, as well as corporate boards, are rethinking approaches to set the stage for successful comebacks.Few industries were hit as hard by the pandemic’s arrival as automotive and mobility. Now, our survey of consumers in China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States shows that , fueled by positive outlooks in the United States and China (exhibit). Car dealerships are getting busier, and many are eagerly seeking more inventory to sell. Overall, mobility is picking up steadily.
    
Moderna was able to develop a COVID-19 vaccine in only 11 months in part because it already had nine vaccines in clinical trials using messenger RNA (mRNA) technology, says CEO Stéphane Bancel. We are now in a world where mRNA as a platform has been derisked for use in vaccines and can be authorized for emergency use.  in the next five years. surprised even consumer-behavior experts. On the , McKinsey partner Kari Alldredge; Anne Grimmelt, a senior knowledge expert in McKinsey’s Consumer Packaged Goods Practice; and Anjali Lai, a senior analyst at Forrester, discuss being shocked by how much bread baking and pet buying went on during lockdowns and how heartily consumers embraced a return to big brands. Because consumers can’t accurately predict their own behavior shifts, companies should get better at mining online data and using advanced analytics to spot trends.Changes in technology, markets, and the labor force provoked by the pandemic have . On the , McKinsey experts discuss corporate boards that are engaging more deeply on broader questions of talent—far beyond just who is CEO and how much compensation they get—and company culture. executives were all set to roll out a proprietary financial-planning tool the company wanted its network of independent financial advisers to embrace. Then the pandemic hit. The crisis required pivoting to virtual engagement, which resulted in creating more opportunities for outreach and better uptake and understanding of the tool.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    Cultivated meat is meat, but it is produced from animal cells that grow in a controlled environment.  examines the potential of this revolutionary technology.
    
    The materials traditionally used to make consumer and commercial goods account for close to half of global greenhouse-gas emissions. , which offers a proprietary technology platform to help companies produce their goods with less negative impact. In a wide-ranging interview on the , the executives discuss growth plans at a time when more companies are looking for sustainability solutions.
Our new edition of  is designed to help 18-year-olds (or so) explore automation and the future of work (heads-up: there could be robots involved). Our “find your fit” mini quiz suggests a few occupations that a kid might consider. Our  series features Tiziana Casciaro, professor of organizational behavior at Toronto’s Rotman School of Management on the new book she coauthored,  (Simon & Schuster, August 2021). The book explains why power comes not from rank but from knowing what is valued and how to deliver it. Also on , global development executive April Rinne talks about her new book,  (Berrett-Koehler Publishers, August 2021), which explores how individuals and organizations can develop adaptable mindsets. This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #69, August 25, 2021The Delta variant has moved the goalposts. felt a surge of optimism in the spring, as vaccination rates were climbing and COVID-19 cases dropping. Those regions now face the disappointment of a reversal, thanks to the spread of the Delta variant. Such whiplash is starting to feel like a way of life for people everywhere, as well as for industries including shipping, retail, and healthcare. This week, McKinsey published updated research examining when the pandemic might end and attempted to estimate when some pandemic-related disruptions could return to what we used to call normal. Among high-income countries, cases caused by the Delta variant reversed the transition toward normalcy first in the United Kingdom, during June and July of 2021, and subsequently in the United States and elsewhere. McKinsey’s analysis supports the view of others that  in most countries for the time being (exhibit). The United Kingdom’s experience nevertheless suggests that once a country has weathered a wave of Delta-driven cases, it may be able to resume the transition toward normalcy. Beyond that, a more realistic epidemiological endpoint might arrive not when herd immunity is achieved but when COVID-19 can be managed as an endemic disease. The biggest overall risk would likely then be the emergence of a significant new variant.
    
One of the most economically pervasive pandemic effects is a boom in shipping costs. , McKinsey partners say that sending a container from Asia to Europe or North America cost roughly $2,000 before the pandemic and $12,000 or more today. Though demand should remain high in the coming months as retailers prepare for the holiday season, prices should begin to come down by the end of the year.While many of consumers’ pandemic-inspired digital habits are sticking, the acceleration into digital channels now seems to be leveling off in both Europe and the United States.  by creating strategies based on long-term value, investing aggressively in tech talent, and being smarter about how they work with data. revealed that amid returning patient volumes and continuing COVID-19 hospitalizations, challenges in clinical-support staffing remain high. Eighty-four percent of survey respondents report trouble with turnover and vacancies in their nursing staffs. This may only be the start of greater challenges, as  that they may leave their roles providing direct patient care in the next year., driven by increasing vaccination rates, stimulus payments in March 2021, and the general reopening of the economy. Consumers’ pent-up demand and willingness to spend in some discretionary categories caused spending to grow at 20 to 30 percent year over year, reaching 4 to 7 percent above pre-COVID-19 levels. Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    , as it has in other regions. Payments players with the right strategies can capitalize on this revolution in a region that is traditionally heavily dependent on cash.
    Amid increased consolidation, digitization, and specialization in the insurance industry,  insurance companies provide. 
    Between September and November of 2020 alone, 178,000 women in the United Kingdom lost their jobs. , saw a corresponding 21 percent rise in the number of women seeking its services, many of which are now offered remotely.
Our new edition of  is designed to help 18-year-olds (or so) explore automation and the future of work (heads-up: there could be robots involved). Our “find your fit” mini quiz suggests a few occupations that a kid might consider. , with 100-plus book recommendations shared by more than 40 leaders and personalities. Be sure to download McKinsey’s  Author Talks and read some of our best interviews with authors of recently published books on business and beyond. Finally, check out  for our monthly business best-seller rankings—prepared exclusively for McKinsey Global Publishing by NPD BookScan—as well as a collection of books by McKinsey authors on the management issues that matter. Next up in books: peruse the  for the annual  (the winner will be announced December 1), and register now for the digital  event on September 23.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #68, August 18, 2021The pandemic’s side effects come in many forms. wears on, its impact is obviously felt in every region, every industry, and indeed every aspect of life. Nonetheless, some of the pandemic’s side effects still have the power to surprise. This week, McKinsey looked at a few of these unexpected consequences, including an explosion in the number of online ratings consumers give to products and services, the acceleration of trends reshaping the bank workforce, dramatic changes in Chinese car-buying behavior, and the possible decline of cash as a part of everyday life.
When lockdowns forced consumers to remain at home, US e-commerce experienced ten years’ growth during the first quarter of 2020. One less discussed outcome is —40 to 80 percent higher during the core pandemic months in 2020 than they had been a year earlier (exhibit). The old levers of brand equity, greater ad spending, and big promotions are simply less relevant in an age when consumers have access to so much word-of-mouth feedback. Companies, McKinsey suggests, can respond in six ways, such as adopting technological tools to analyze reviews and using consumer feedback to redesign products.
    
The global banking industry had already been undergoing major changes when the pandemic struck. In the previous decade, branch footprints shrunk by about 20 percent in the United States and by 60 percent in Nordic countries. McKinsey’s pre-COVID-19 research suggests that the number of people in almost all bank-branch roles will decline over the next decade. , making it more important for banks to focus now on upskilling and reskilling at scale. Successful players are currently building a scalable learning infrastructure and investing in a learning culture. Of the huge health challenges created by COVID-19, perhaps the least understood is its impact on global mental health. , a nonprofit whose mission is to accelerate brain-health research and mental-health advocacy. CEOs and other senior executives need to make a personal commitment to corporate behavioral-health programs if they are to succeed, he says. These leaders should focus on reducing the stigma of mental illness and on cultivating a corporate culture conducive to mental wellness. in the wake of COVID-19. McKinsey’s most recent survey of approximately 2,400 auto consumers in 19 major Chinese cities shows declining brand loyalty, a marked preference for trading up among consumers with less-expensive vehicles, and a significant increase in the use of digital channels during the vehicle-purchase process. While overall vehicle sales fell in China in 2020, sales of new-energy vehicles (NEVs) grew by an impressive 22 percent. Our survey reveals that 63 percent of Chinese consumers are willing to purchase NEVs, up from 20 percent in 2017.Here are some of this week’s other key findings from our sector research:
    In an interview with McKinsey, , discusses what it will take to roll out COVID-19 vaccines on a continent-wide scale, to increase vaccine manufacturing within Africa, and to enhance coordination across its borders.
    These outcomes could help Africa better
    control its response to COVID-19 and any
    future infectious diseases. 
    . To achieve these R&D goals, Chinese companies should allocate more resources to higher-risk, longer-term R&D projects and nurture creative talent by designing career pathways that reward innovation with status and incentives. Companies should also consider splitting R&D into two parts: one focused on innovation, the other on excellence in project execution.
McKinsey takes summer reading seriously. Here are some resources to help you find business books that captivate and enlighten: In  (Elliott & Thompson, July 2021), a new book coauthored with Natasha de Terán, former SWIFT CEO and McKinsey alumnus Gottfried Leibbrandt discusses how the pandemic accelerated the move away from cash. The book analyzes the implications of electronic payments—already huge in China—for banks, cryptocurrencies, and society’s relationship with money.  , with 100-plus book recommendations shared by more than 40 leaders and personalities. Be sure to download McKinsey’s  Author Talks and read some of our best interviews with authors of recently published books on business and beyond. Finally, check out  for our monthly business best-seller rankings—prepared exclusively for McKinsey Global Publishing by NPD BookScan—as well as a collection of books by McKinsey authors on the management issues that matter. Next up in books: peruse the  for the annual  (the winner will be announced December 1) and register for the digital  event, on September 23.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #67, August 11, 2021The Delta variant threatens health, as well as recent positive economic data. cruel and strange aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic is the fact that good and bad news often seem to arrive at the same time. Death rates may fall to new lows while case counts begin a precipitous climb; hospitalizations may drop dramatically in one region while reaching a breaking point in another. This month, McKinsey had good news to report on many aspects of the world economy, but also offered a sobering look at how variants—in particular, the Delta variant—are bringing a fresh tide of bad news. notes strengthening global industrial activity, the return of consumer demand, and growing trade momentum amid the backdrop of a worsening pandemic wave. The Delta variant of the coronavirus spread to more countries in recent weeks, and the total number of cases officially logged soared past half a million per day. The global number of deaths is now about two-thirds as high as it was at the peak of the previous wave, in April of this year. As the virus spreads, the potential rises for a vaccine-resistant strain to emerge. Meanwhile, in poorer countries, vaccines are scarce, and most populations are little protected (exhibit).
    
Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    McKinsey estimates that . In 2019, consumer expenditures by Black households totaled approximately $835 billion; combined spending by all Black households has increased 5 percent annually over the past two decades. Serving the Black consumer well is entirely possible for companies that take the time to figure out the needs of what others may dismiss as a “niche” audience.
    Historically, few companies have organizational structures that are designed to treat . Companies that lead in this area often have sustainability teams embedded into business units, funds with tailored criteria allocated to sustainability investments, and sustainability-specific performance metrics.
    On the  podcast, McKinsey partners Sebastian Gatzer and Clarisse Magnin discuss how they assumed the pandemic would distract consumers from sustainability issues. Instead, . Companies have to make investments and take risks in order to achieve a sustainability-based model, but overall it can pay off economically.
McKinsey takes summer reading seriously. Here are resources to help find books that captivate and enlighten:In their newly released , Harvard professor Cass Sunstein and University of Chicago professor Richard Thaler update their 2008 book on interventions aimed at getting people to act in their own best interests. In a conversation with McKinsey, the authors discuss how nudges can help people make better choices and combat “sludge,” which are processes burdened by aggravating requirements. , with 100-plus book recommendations shared by more than 40 leaders and personalities. Be sure to download McKinsey’s Author Talks  and read some of our best interviews with authors of recently published books on business and beyond. Finally, check out  for our monthly business best-seller rankings—prepared exclusively for McKinsey Global Publishing by NPD BookScan—as well as a collection of books by McKinsey authors on the management issues that matter. Next up in books: stay tuned for this year’s unveiling of the long list for the annual  on August 16 (the winner will be announced December 1), and register for the digital  event on September 23.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #66, August 4, 2021When change accelerates, so does the need to learn. uncertainty was rising. Brexit, trade disputes, and decarbonization were already having a profound impact on many industries and regions. Then the pandemic ushered in an era of shutdowns, hybrid work, and reversals, like the one some regions are experiencing now as variants bring renewed surges in case counts. This week, McKinsey examined the one constant throughout this turbulent era: the need to learn, adapt, and change. The COVID-19 crisis and subsequent move to hybrid working models accelerated , particularly social, emotional, and advanced cognitive abilities. Fifty-eight percent of respondents to  said that closing skills gaps became a higher priority since the pandemic began. That statistic only hints at the need for retraining:  from the  finds that more than 100 million workers in eight large economies may need to switch occupations by 2030. Companies should make a comprehensive inventory of skills across their organizations, create “skills hubs” for ongoing learning, and build learning ecosystems through partnerships with communities and educators (exhibit).
    
 (HBCUs) in the United States could increase Black worker incomes by about $10 billion and boost the economy with $1.2 billion in incremental business profits, $300 million in decreased student-loan debt, and $1 billion in additional consumer expenditures. For some HBCUs, 2020 was their strongest-ever year of fundraising; if this level can be sustained over time, these institutions can continue the critical work they have been doing since 1837.. Developing the adaptability muscle requires self-care, a focus on purpose, the ability to recognize the default mindset, deeper connections with colleagues, and an environment where it is safe to learn.  are always challenging, but are particularly difficult in times of crisis, when leaders are under pressure to deliver fast results. McKinsey’s experience is that dual focus on performance and organizational health leads to the most successful transformations. Two case studies of large US government agencies demonstrate how practices such as setting aspirational goals, creating a transformation office, and accurately assessing progress can lead to meaningful change.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    According to the popular “” metric, a software-as-a-service company’s growth rate when added to its free cash flow rate should equal 40 percent or higher. McKinsey research finds that barely one-third of software companies achieve this. Our experts analyze the four main approaches of companies that do and suggest ways to emulate them.
    In private equity, making an “add-on” strategy work depends on the successful integration of companies. The pitfalls are many, however, and deals can wither as a result. .
    Point-of-sale financing in the United States has grown significantly over the past 24 months. McKinsey provides an overview of the “” market, details key factors influencing growth, and offers ideas for market entry for banks and partnerships for merchants. 
    The rise of autonomous vehicles is shifting demand for automotive chips. , which includes some OEMs considering in-house design. 
Our  series features Michael Useem, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School, where he is also the director of the Center for Leadership and Change Management. He discusses his new book , which explores the thought processes behind leaders’ pivotal choices. Also on , Jeffrey E. Garten discusses his book, . The former dean of the Yale School of Management and undersecretary of commerce in the Clinton administration examines the end of the gold standard and its ramifications for world markets. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #65, July 28, 2021It’s time to focus on healing.—encompassing health, fitness, nutrition, appearance, sleep, and mindfulness—is growing at 5 to 10 percent a year. It makes sense that consumers, after everything they have endured throughout the COVID-19 crisis, are seeking ways to take control of their well-being. Sectors including travel and education are also focusing on recovering from their pandemic wounds. This week, McKinsey took a deep dive into how a range of companies are trying to help consumers heal, and how companies and sectors can heal themselves.As part of our series on , . By 2030, consumers may get tattoos where they buy mascara; seek advice from the fridge, which talked to the mattress, about what to eat in order to sleep better; and triage their medical conditions at home before reaching out to a doctor. As consumers increasingly consider wellness when they make purchases, the opportunity to serve their needs is growing (exhibit).
    
Over the past year, McKinsey has interviewed a number of wellness-industry leaders. , in New York City, discusses overcoming pandemic-related obstacles with a brand focused on omnichannel delivery, community, and authentic extensions and partnerships. , talks about building a relationship with a consumer at the pivotal moment when she is pregnant with her first child. Brian McNamara, CEO of , and Appearances seemed to matter less to many people under lockdowns during the pandemic, which likely helped contribute to the 33 percent drop in global sales that the beauty industry suffered in 2020. On the , McKinsey experts discuss the incipient rebound that is occurring in the fragrance category. , with quiz-type diagnostics that help consumers discover new products in a fun way; personalized packaging; and a wider adoption of “social selling,” which is already gaining traction in China.Mental healthcare is a key component of wellness, but the stigma that surrounds mental-health conditions often prevents sufferers from seeking treatment.  by providing all employees with education on the topic, training managers to recognize the signs of mental illness and substance abuse, and adopting nonstigmatizing language., where the average student is now five months behind in math and four months behind in reading. The economic ripple effects may cause a $128 billion to $188 billion loss to the US economy once these students enter the workforce. Educators should work to safely reopen schools, use outreach programs to reengage students who have disconnected from learning, and help make up for learning loss with tutoring and after-school programs. Moreover, the education system should consider exploring ways to benefit from technology, hybrid models, remote learning, homeschooling, and learning hubs over the long term.Travel is another sector that has emerged bruised from pandemic lockdowns.  build capacity, invest aggressively in digital innovation, and look for collaboration opportunities to help make flying easier for consumers. An app that would allow travelers to manage verified certifications for COVID-19 vaccines and test results, for example, would be handy. In a recent interview, Airbnb CEO : early on, the business dropped 80 percent in eight weeks and the company had to lay off 25 percent of its workforce. But by the end of the year, the company had launched a successful IPO.Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #64, July 21, 2021How does it end—and where does it leave us? in parts of the world where the COVID-19 pandemic was waning, falling in places that saw huge surges recently, and just beginning to rise in previously little-impacted parts of the globe. Trying to determine the end of a story while the plot is still twisting is difficult. But this week, McKinsey sought answers to the burning questions of how the pandemic can finally be vanquished and how vaccines can reach the world, as well as what companies can do to mitigate new geopolitical risks and cope with inflation and volatility.
    
The world is unlikely to ever reach global herd immunity, but it can contain the virus with a combination of vaccines, improved testing, and smarter quarantining, based on known outbreaks, rather than large, blunt lockdowns. This was one conclusion of an interdisciplinary panel of global-health, national-security, and technology experts that McKinsey assembled to envision . By 2025, COVID-19 will have cost the world between $16 trillion and $35 trillion. A multifaceted approach to solving this pandemic and averting others should include scaling nanobiophysics technology in order to create precision molecular testing and improving data-sharing systems.Dr. Seth Berkley, CEO of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance (a public–private global-health partnership that works to increase access to immunization in poor countries), spoke with McKinsey . Through a partnership with 193 countries and territories, Gavi has been involved in securing two billion doses of COVID-19 vaccines for the second half of 2021, with the goal of immunizing every healthcare worker in the world. Obstacles to worldwide vaccination remain huge: while 49.6 percent of inhabitants of high-income countries had received at least one dose of the vaccine as of July 14, only 1 percent of those in low-income countries had.The velocity of change coming out of the pandemic is generating new forms of financial and operational risk as companies grapple with inflation, capacity constraints, and supply-chain disruptions. Higher inflation has returned to the United States and the European Union, with volatility in prices for commodities including lumber and steel. To strategize for both the near and long term, companies are wise to establish  that bring together specialists in supply chain, planning, finance, operations, and engineering.In the next two decades, competition for global influence is likely to reach its highest level since the Cold War. Current tensions are most apparent in the unfolding competition between China and the United States, the homes of 76 of the world’s 100 most valuable companies. To , boards should devote time to big-picture questions. Companies also need to think critically about their corporate narratives and decide whether they are global entities or whether ties to a specific country or region are more important.Other key findings from our sector research this week:
    , but today’s consumers, suppliers, and dealers demand more digital, connected, and electric vehicles. Automakers will have to hire more software engineers and reskill up to one-quarter of their current workforces.
    Climate change poses specific risks for urban areas, 90 percent of which are coastal. By 2050, more than 800 million urban residents could be affected by sea-level rise and coastal flooding. A report cowritten by McKinsey and C40 Cities Climate Leadership, a network of large cities committed to addressing climate change, identifies .
    , McKinsey research finds. Business leaders can rely on the same valuation principles and approaches they would use to assess investments in developed markets.
Our  series features Melody Wilding, an executive coach, licensed social worker, and professor of human behavior about her book . She addresses the complexity of being both highly sensitive and high achieving, a combination she says can be a competitive advantage in those who know how to overcome self-doubt. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #63, July 14, 2021The future of work is far from settled. ushered in the opportunity to rethink how we work. It’s a sea change that occurs less than once in a generation and has the potential to reshape society in countless ways. This week, McKinsey examined the need for humility as leaders, organizations, and employees grapple with learning best practices, testing solutions, and admitting that nobody has all the answers in hand.Companies risk alienating their employees—and even losing them—if they refuse to acknowledge . Employers want to reestablish normality by bringing workers back to the office; employees want far more work-from-home (exhibit). For employers, the risks are high: recent surveys found that 40 percent of workers globally are considering leaving their current employers by the end of the year. Companies must acknowledge that figuring out a hybrid working model will be a long-term project and require a significant period of testing and learning.  
    
Research with more than 500 senior executives across eight industries helped McKinsey identify . Companies that increased performance throughout the pandemic invested more time crafting clear goals and clarifying strategy; empowered small, cross-silo teams to make decisions; spent more time on coaching and recognition; and adopted new collaboration technologies. Going back to the office isn’t a silver bullet, especially in light of weary and stressed workforces. Instead, companies need to build muscle in these key areas in order to make a return to the workplace successful.  Since the start of the pandemic, 42 percent of employees globally have reported a decline in mental health. Mental-health conditions cause absenteeism, presenteeism, and approximately
$1 trillion worth of lost productivity a year, according to the World Health Organization. The good news is that a meta-analysis shows that for every dollar companies spent on wellness programs, their healthcare costs fell by approximately $3.27 and their absenteeism costs by about $2.73. . These include mindfulness tools, data-collection wearables, meditation and hypnosis apps, and virtual mental-health services. , training employees to bounce back from burnout, and proactively reskilling their workforces. On the  podcast, partners Bryan Hancock and Ashish Kothari discuss retail companies that need to add new skills because of the sectors’ mass pivot to omnichannel during the pandemic. They share examples of companies that have replaced some work with automation and then redirected employees’ time and energy to new tasks that can grow the business. oversees one of the oldest American financial institutions, with $38.0 trillion in assets under custody and administration, and $3.5 trillion in assets under management. On the  podcast, he talks about his view of taking a stand on environmental, social, and corporate governance issues as part of mitigating investment risk. Remote work has made it harder to give employees opportunities for apprenticeship, slowed innovation, and created mental-health risks. Communicating to employees how values play into the big picture helps reestablish bonds.Other key findings from our sector research this week:
    Seth Moore, former chief strategy and analytics officer of online retailer Overstock.com, who is now a senior adviser to McKinsey, clears up several misconceptions about . It’s not about changing prices frequently, nor is it a blend of art and science. It’s plain old science, whereby an algorithm can increase the rate at which a retailer makes good pricing decisions. Personalizing prices for customers is a delicate matter; the best strategy is to offer “just for you” discounts that make a shopper feel like they won something.
    McKinsey’s analysis of 54 markets around the world found that over half of all . If postal executives can leverage their existing distribution networks to provide financial services, their companies could become a more integral part of their customers’ everyday lives and create enduring business models.
Our  series features Shankar Vedantam, host of NPR’s Hidden Brain podcast, about his book  (W. W. Norton, March 2021), coauthored with Bill Mesler. No one likes the idea of being duped, but our ability to persuade ourselves enables bonds and passions that logic would rule out. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #62, July 7, 2021When two distinct goals are imperative, the only choice is to solve for both. pandemic, businesses and governments faced the need to solve multiple, competing priorities simultaneously. One of the toughest: how to keep an economy going while at the same time shutting it down to protect citizens from infection. As some regions emerge from the worst of the health crisis, it’s tempting to think that there could be a return to focusing on just one main concern. But this week, McKinsey experts examined sectors, particularly defense and national infrastructure, where solving for dual imperatives is more important than ever.—and the many risks it implies—by taking dramatic action to decarbonize. Obstacles to change include the primacy of having mission-critical capability and long equipment life cycles (which means fossil-fuel-powered equipment in use now, or coming into service shortly, will still be fielded in 2050). But defense forces can begin setting priorities for decarbonization by categorizing their emissions as those for which they are directly responsible and those resulting from the supply chain, and by how much emissions reductions would impact mission-critical initiatives (exhibit). 
    
The May 2021 ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline, the United States’ largest pipeline network for delivery of refined petroleum products, made one thing clear: . In light of the new level of threat, companies will have to improve their knowledge of their own operations and vulnerabilities and establish high-fidelity baselines for the devices on their networks so they can detect subtle anomalies. Owners and operators must move to a zero-trust mindset and need to improve their systems’ ability to respond and establish control. In the not-so-distant future, waste products such as . One country championing the use of such sustainable aviation fuels (SAFs) is India. —which is working toward making carbon-zero flying a reality by the middle of the century—is a blueprint for India’s ongoing transition to SAFs. The coalition’s community in India has set the goal of flying 100 million passengers on SAFs at a 10 percent blend by 2030.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    On the  podcast, Tanya Baker, global leader of Goldman Sach’s internal incubator GS Accelerate, talks about . Two big lessons: if you have to choose between a great idea and a great team of people, pick the people, because ultimately talent rules outcomes. Her second takeaway: people who have been successful in other roles at Goldman Sachs are not always the same people who will succeed at building a new business. Entrepreneurship often requires a separate set of skills.
    On , senior partners Kim Baroudy and Massimo Mazza discuss . Europe’s fragmentation—its 24 languages and multiple regulatory environments—is a hidden strength, as it forces founders to think internationally. Capital growth and the kinds of companies achieving scale in Latin America is changing fast. Silicon Valley can feel flattered by imitation, as tech hubs grow in Tel Aviv, São Paulo, Frankfurt, London, Shanghai, Paris, Berlin, and Stockholm. 
    How did ? Claus Bunkenborg, CEO of MobilePay; Peter Klein, executive vice president, strategy and solutions, for new payment platforms at Mastercard; and Lars Sjögren, CEO of P27 Nordic Payments, discuss the influence of Nordic history and business culture on the sector. One theory: a history of wars has forced these small countries to learn to compromise and collaborate. 
Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a business case for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #61, June 30, 2021How do we make technology rise to our aspirations? as companies and countries envision a post-COVID-19 future, is rethinking how technology can serve our needs. Science-fiction scenarios may depict computers developing minds of their own, but the work of updating algorithms, adjusting risk models, and deciding how data will be leveraged is still very much a human job. This week, McKinsey made the case for why open-data ecosystems for finance is the next frontier and examined the technology rethink required in retail, insurance, banking, automotive, photonics, and biotech.Robust digital financial infrastructure proved its worth during the COVID-19-crisis, helping governments cushion people and businesses from the economic shock. The  discusses the next step:  could see GDP gains of between 1 and 5 percent by 2030, with benefits flowing to both consumers and financial institutions. The research examines 24 use cases in banking and payments, focusing on the European Union, United States, United Kingdom, and India (exhibit). 
    
The  will harness the power of data, quantum computing, artificial intelligence, and augmented reality, says serial entrepreneur and senior adviser to McKinsey John Straw on the  podcast. The biggest mistake retail companies make? Unwillingness to invest in something that doesn’t automatically feed the bottom line. The biggest win: using cutting-edge technology to give consumers a way of envisioning their lives if they go ahead and buy.In a  interview, Bart Schlatmann, the CEO of Allianz Direct, discusses . The direct-to-consumer insurance business inside financial-services giant Allianz serves multiple European markets on a single platform. The CEO’s first move was to put himself under pressure: with approximately 70 engineers, he promised to launch a business in two markets within 18 months.The COVID-19 pandemic created significant challenges for financial institutions in both modeling and model-risk management. , including using agile modeling, upgrading data architecture, and embracing automation.Batteries and fuel cells get the attention, but  is a nascent zero-emissions technology that some automotive OEMs, component suppliers, and start-ups are reconsidering. Low capital-expenditure requirements for combustion engines, decreasing hydrogen prices, and the relative efficiency of some types of vehicles are making this technology, once considered too expensive, increasingly relevant.Another technology ripe for reinvention is . Although the laser market has steadily increased since the 1970s, innovation and revenue growth have slowed over the past decade. The creation of integrated devices combining lasers, sensors, and optics could usher in a new age of opportunity. has remained resilient through one of the worst economic crises in decades. Despite a brief downturn in 2020, share-price evolution has been positive overall since the beginning of the pandemic, and funding continues to grow at a record rate. Future success will depend on improving the translation of research into new companies, raising more capital, cultivating entrepreneurial talent, and building global networks.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    A  survey of 18,000 people in 15 counties identified . One revelation: though numerous skills are associated with having a university degree, for “self-confidence,” “courage and risk-taking,” and “empathy,” there is no such association. Scholars can puzzle over this: more education was associated with lower proficiency of some valuable traits, such as “humility.”
    The combination of increased burnout among women and the hold placed on diversity and inclusion initiatives has put . Companies should ensure flexible work and employee well-being and create programs to promote diverse hiring and promotion.
Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #60, June 23, 2021With enough data and insight, can we get a peek at the future?says McKinsey’s global managing partner Kevin Sneader, paraphrasing John Kenneth Galbraith’s famous quip before outlining eight trends that he predicts will define 2021 and beyond. Despite the complexity of trying to peer into the future, this week McKinsey experts propose what’s ahead for capital markets, corporate organization, and medical research. In a deep analysis of the state of Black America, our experts envision what the future could be for nearly 13 percent of the US labor force.To get a handle on what’s to come, McKinsey finance and risk experts, with input from the , offer  (exhibit). Further charts examine how economies have recovered from crises in the past and model possible outcomes.
    
On the  podcast, . He predicts that e-grocery and telemedicine will stick and that “revenge travel,” where people vacation after being cooped up, will kick in. Companies will likely focus on developing more resilient supply chains and attempting to recover in ways that meet their sustainability targets. More than anything, pandemic-era innovations will reshape life for a long time to come., who make up 12.9 percent of the US labor force but earn only 9.6 percent of total wages? Achieving better standards of living, jobs, education, healthcare, food, and consumer goods will depend on changes to the world Black people currently face. The  concluded that hiring with a diversity focus, strengthening schools, upgrading the quality of jobs that many Black workers currently have, and supporting Black entrepreneurs are key to closing the prosperity gap.On , organizational experts Chris Gagnon and Elizabeth Mygatt discuss  themselves, making them more able to handle disruptions like the one they just went through. Leaders should examine their company’s value agenda as though they were a private-equity firm scrutinizing a potential deal. Being clear about what everyone is trying to accomplish helps leaders choose the right talent, create a project-oriented organization, and build up speed.Some companies are using their plans for a COVID-19 as the basis for complete strategy overhauls. But not every company wants or needs to do that. Instead, they can use  or short interventions. In particular, companies should examine opportunities to allocate resources to growth pockets, get ahead of climate risks, and adopt new technologies."Rollercoaster" is one term that’s been used to describe . McKinsey finance experts Tim Koller and Peter Stumpner provide more nuance and reflection on the  podcast. After the big market drop last year, a handful of companies—mostly in the tech, electric vehicle, and semiconductor industries—began diverging from the market. The result is the Mega 25, companies that accounted for 40 percent of the total market cap added in one year. The experts discuss how sustainable these valuations are and whether the word “bubble” applies.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    . The biggest impact will be in the hypothesis-formation phase, because of how much faster and more accurately molecular properties can be predicted.
    . Companies should focus on improving carbon accounting, filling in data gaps, and forming alliances to create new supply ecosystems. Once they have reduced energy and materials waste, they need to examine the “Scope 3” emissions that occur up and down their value stream.
    A  survey of 860 executives found that  as those in the bottom two quartiles. Intangibles include research, technology, software, advertising and branding, and human capital.
Our  series features Mia Bay, a professor of American history at the University of Pennsylvania, discussing her new book  (Harvard University Press, 2021). Bay examines the history of exclusion and harassment Black Americans have faced as they attempted to drive, fly, park, lodge, or even eat on the road. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #59, June 16, 2021Life beyond the COVID-19 pandemic holds much promise. once the COVID-19 pandemic eventually fades into history. As viral-spread and economic-fallout curves both flatten in some parts of the world, signs of change and growth indicate a bright future. Our central pandemic-related analysis this week explores a possible new age of global prosperity, with high rates of economic growth and surging healthcare innovation. Individual groups and industries—including Black US entrepreneurs, medical researchers, and the hospitality sector—have the opportunity to benefit from a reset in context and attitudes.In the postpandemic era, much is possible. Just with the technology that is currently available—no unheard-of breakthrough required—it’s possible to achieve 3 to 4 percent global economic growth each year for a decade. Leaders won’t need to make a hard choice between sustained and inclusive growth. Instead, growth can be better overall if it’s more equitable. The pandemic experience provoked what could become a renaissance in public-health innovation and delivery.  (exhibit).
    
, which makes recovery harder for their businesses. But the recent racial-equity reckoning in the United States has focused multiple industries on finding solutions to that and other obstacles for Black business owners. Banks can increase access to capital, and corporations can offer emergency grants. Financial institutions can both increase financial education and design systems that are more user friendly and communicative.
    
How can corporations maintain their cultures in a world of hybrid work? On the  podcast, talent experts Bryan Hancock, Bill Schaninger, and Brooke Weddle discuss . Leaders can focus on helping employees find purpose and make the office the new off site, a place where intentional togetherness occurs. There is a risk, however, that a divide will grow between remote workers and those who come into the office.If the office is the new off site, the home is the new clinical-trial site. To the growing list of unintended pandemic consequences, add . In the face of severe disruption to clinical-trial research during lockdowns, trial sponsors mobilized rapidly to preserve continuity of care and data integrity—for example, by adopting remote consent and patient monitoring, videoconference assessments, and at-home phlebotomy. The medical industry can now build on the unplanned migration to off-site trial settings.Leisure travel, particularly to outdoor and beach settings, is likely to be a bright spot in the US hospitality industry’s recovery. In a video conversation,  and suggests pockets of emerging demand in which industry leaders should focus resources.The  podcast steps back and examines . McKinsey experts Patrick Finn, Mihir Mysore, and Ophelia Usher discuss how leaders must be willing to revisit assumptions, change direction, and admit mistakes when the firmament is shaking. Also key: an integrated nerve center of decision makers who can think and act quickly. Above all, leaders who have lived through hardships are essential in such circumstances.Our  series features Kirsten Neff, an associate professor of educational psychology at the University of Texas at Austin, discussing her new book . Neff examines why women shame themselves for failure and how they can learn to be kind to themselves while fighting for their professional wants and needs. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #58, June 9, 2021Understanding who we have become. as illustrated by the last year and a quarter. This week, McKinsey drilled into numerous changes that have reset the context for companies, employees, and societies. McKinsey experts analyzed changes to consumer profiles in Asia, the consequences of women’s exodus from the workforce, and why more than 70 HR leaders believe this is a new era for their profession. Our  suggests a way of getting a handle on the ever-morphing human landscape: we all need to become anthropologists, skilled in recognizing the cultural patterns around us (see more on our latest Author Talks below).Half of global consumption growth over the next decade will come from Asia, according to research from the . Falling poverty rates, rising incomes, shrinking household size, aging populations, and more women earning more money are all . Those who wish to sell to these consumers need to understand factors including their growing interest in sustainability, Asian brands, and new forms of ownership. Another trend to keep in mind: inequality is growing and was likely exacerbated by the pandemic (exhibit).
    
 in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. After years of pressure to digitize their roles and move employees into “self serve” solutions, McKinsey’s interviews with more than 70 chief HR officers in Europe revealed an impulse to revive human interaction. These leaders believe they must engage personally to bring in and retain strategic talent and improve morale. One reason for the pivot: they learned during the pandemic, when decisions had to be made at lightning speed, that leadership talent is everywhere and just needs the right support to flourish.Pressure can accelerate change, but sometimes reverses it. That’s the sad story behind the . The latest US Bureau of Labor statistics show that recent employment gains dramatically favor men. A political scientist who studies this “shecession” and an HR executive who left her job to oversee her children’s online schooling discuss the lost paychecks, stalled careers, and lower lifetime earning that could reverberate for decades to come.Another thing women lose by leaving the workforce? Purpose. McKinsey organizational experts found that 70 percent of people say they derive their purpose in life through their work. On The McKinsey Podcast, partner Naina Dhingra and senior partner Bill Schaninger discuss why , rather than imposers of a collective purpose. The pandemic has made employees contemplate these questions more than ever, with millennials the most concerned that work provides a sense of meaning.US healthcare consumers say they gained weight, exercised less, and delayed care throughout the pandemic. Their view of healthcare providers and what they want in the future changed too, according to McKinsey surveys.  by focusing on the “whole person” and offering incentives to both consumers and providers to research costs and options.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    Nordic companies, with their legacies of long-term focus on environmental issues, seem well-positioned to outperform while companies around the world catch up on sustainability. But a McKinsey analysis showed that many Nordic firms trail their global peers.  include making a deal a year, spending more, and setting ambitious productivity-improvement goals. 
    Sales of battery-electric vehicles are expected to grow 25 percent annually through 2030. With costs and competition increasing  of location, charging speed, and partnerships.
     if they decide whether to be orchestrators or providers, design incentives that attract the right participants, and improve technology with cloud infrastructure and a software-as-a-service approach. 
    . Automating the “know your customer” process also makes things smoother for customers and less tedious for employees. 
    The market for biosimilars is expected to double in size to more than $30 billion by 2025 and
    more than $60 billion by 2030.  to take advantage of this growth.
Our  series features Gillian Tett, the Financial Times markets and finance columnist and US managing editor, on her book Anthro-Vision: A New Way to See in Business and Life. Tett explores how anthropologists get inside the minds of people in order to understand other cultures and how leaders can do the same to appraise their own environments. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #57, June 2, 2021Problems were to be expected, but not these problems. has left businesses and governments to grapple with a perplexing collection of supply-chain and logistical disruptions. Over a year ago, we knew we were facing upheavals in health, education, and workplace systems. Ramifications such as the semiconductor shortage, however, were harder to predict. This week, McKinsey examined a variety of unexpected pandemic consequences and looked for ways to address them. threatens economic recoveries and poses an urgent problem for carmakers, which have already announced production rollbacks—and billions of dollars in expected revenue losses—as a result. McKinsey experts examined the causes of the shortage, including a drop in consumer demand for vehicles at the onset of the pandemic, which prompted semiconductor suppliers to shift production to other products. Automakers and suppliers should consider significant strategic changes to head off a repeat (exhibit).
    
Grocery is , not once but multiple times as consumers respond to the evolving situation.  in the United Kingdom, where the company has a strong online business, and in Central Europe, where growth is coming off a low base, said Matthew Simister, Tesco’s Central Europe CEO, in an interview. Growing e-grocery leads to  in Europe, and if so, which formats are best positioned for success? McKinsey identified amply stocked “soft discounters” and moderately sized, centrally located “hypermarkets light” as winning models. Leading players are participating in the  that is lowering labor costs and supporting e-grocery. Another crucial tactic:  by strategically discounting, improving private-label lines, and offering a large variety of cheap products. is among the saddest unanticipated turns in the pandemic. After the first wave of the disease faded quickly in 2020, the current disaster took the lives of nearly 28,000 people in one week last month, amid 2.3 million new reported cases. The world should take action, write partner Pooja Kumar and senior partner Navjot Singh, with support for oxygen and vaccine production and distribution. Such help not only serves a humanitarian purpose but also lowers the risk that variants will threaten recoveries elsewhere.Some of the health repercussions of the pandemic are indirect, such as the side effect of fewer people seeking treatment for mental and behavioral health problems.  tracks how many people are accessing care for problems including substance abuse and serious mental illness.Other key findings from our sector research this week:
     compared with 25 years ago. The  mapped the pathways through which a dollar of company revenue reaches households. Comparing two periods, 1994–96 and 2016–18, productivity gains amounted to 25 percent in real terms, though wages grew only 11 percent. Where did the gains from labor productivity go? Predominantly to capital income.
     with six building blocks, including upskilling and focusing on data management. There’s good reason to try: a McKinsey analysis of 350 industrial companies found that those that made investments in automation, e-commerce, and other areas achieved higher revenues and total returns to shareholders than digital laggards.
     into areas including mobile homes, sports and outdoor tools, and home food and beverage equipment. On the  podcast, Peter Kjellberg, chief marketing officer and head of global verticals at Dometic, explains his system to test whether a company will support a brand reinvention: look into the CEO’s eyes, and if he or she does not display genuine enthusiasm, forget it.
Our  series features Shankar Vedantam, host of NPR’s Hidden Brain podcast, about his , coauthored with Bill Mesler. No one likes the idea of being duped, but our ability to persuade ourselves enables bonds and passions that logic would rule out. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our a curated collection of our  relating to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #56, May 26, 2021How can we prepare better for next time? or vice versa, leaders must toggle between managing for the present and the future. This week, McKinsey examined how sectors including health, air travel, consumer retail, and wealth management can plan for the long term even as they cope with the immediate disruptions of the pandemic. The bottom line: modeling, predicting, and planning are all important, but investing with courage is essential.Five dollars a person. That’s how much , which has caused what may become a $16 trillion global economic disruption (exhibit). By spending a total of
$357 billion over the next decade on preparations including pathogen surveillance, global immunization, and medical supply stockpiles, countries can reduce the likelihood of a repeat. 
    
Other health concerns need preventative action too.  by investing in solutions for mental health, obesity, back pain, diabetes, and smoking, among other problems. The pandemic’s devastating consequences—a half-million lives and 7.5 percent of GDP lost in 2020 alone—have created a unique moment for Europe to rethink health-resource allocation, funding, and delivery models.On , the firm’s air-travel experts Alex Dichter and Robin Riedel discuss , which suffered roughly half a trillion dollars in revenue loss in 2020. Airlines are thinking about safety, recovering business, and how to bring back employees and equipment. In the future, sustainability, cargo by drone, and customer experience will be among the top priorities.Let there be no doubt: top executives confirm that their  that isn’t essential to perform on site. , a quick look accompanied by a deep dive, illustrates that while leaders know hybrid is the future, they and their employees are mired in doubt and anxiety about what it all means.: in 2020, the online grocery channel grew by 55 percent, 60 percent of customers changed their shopping behaviors, and the industry sold 8 percent more groceries by volume. Looking ahead, European grocers should expect grocery spending to decrease slightly, some of the behavioral changes to stick, and healthy and sustainable food preferences to grow.An April McKinsey survey of 29,000 respondents in 24 countries found that while the pandemic drove rapid adoption of digital channels, growth has plateaued in the past six months and may begin to slip back as the virus retreats.  by gaining their trust, investing in “,” and innovating to provide excellent experiences, particularly in education, grocery, and healthcare. COVID-19 underscored how important it is to have tools that improve decision making in a crisis. One such tool is “nowcasting,” a prediction model that uses complex econometric techniques and contemporaneous data to provide a timely view of economic indicators.  that involves improving the quality and reducing the number of variables., who steered clients through turmoil and saw 9 percent growth—a record—in median assets per advisor compared with the year prior. McKinsey’s annual report on  collected data from roughly 70,000 North American financial advisors. Among findings: fee-based revenues grew but were offset by a decline in fee pricing.Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras.  For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office. COVID-19: Briefing note #55, May 19, 2021Making the most of the great reset. Where the virus is subsiding, people can begin assembling an approach to life and business that combines what they miss about the time before COVID-19 and what they discovered during the pandemic. That future must include a plan for those, such as the unemployed, who are still stuck on pause.This week, McKinsey took a deep dive into employment and workplace issues, with multiple studies, articles, and podcasts.A  found that 90 percent envision a future with some combination of remote and on-site work, but most (68 percent) have no detailed plan for how it will work (exhibit). The surveyed executives, from a wide range of industries, have good reason to desire a future with remote options: large numbers say it has led to increases in productivity and customer satisfaction.
    
To help companies design their strategies, , categorizing them into four types with varying needs for interaction. Office versus home is not the only paradigm; options include teams that work mostly remotely but come together for periods of intense collaboration, or hub-and-spoke systems where remote workers can come into satellite or coworking spaces as desired. On the , partners Susan Lund and Bryan Hancock and senior partner Bill Schaninger discuss  on the . In the United States, 17 million people are in jobs that may see less demand, while globally 100 million people may need new skills. The daunting panorama, particularly for workers in retail and travel, underscores the need to reskill and move jobs to people and people to jobs.Vaccine development need never be the same after the pandemic. McKinsey researchers examined . The unprecedented speed was due to regulators moving faster, companies and governments accepting high investment risk for billions of dollars, around-the-clock lab work, and—because the virus spread with tragic speed—accelerated clinical trials. Some of the victories, such as fast decision making within pharma companies and high tolerance for investment risk, could be applied to future drug development.Viral-vector gene therapy is emerging as a scientific superstar, its power demonstrated by one of the early-approved COVID-19 vaccines.  but also several challenges, including the expense and side effects of high doses.Even amid so much change, television advertising is still relevant. Advertisers often simply hand off their broadcast strategies to media agencies, but evaluating data faster, adjusting ad placement, and increasing the frequency of media tenders can .Our  series features Dambisa Moyo, an economist who currently sits on the boards of Chevron, 3M, and Condé Nast, on her new book,  (Basic Books, 2021). The book outlines traditional board tasks and describes new “cultural frontier” responsibilities. In their new book,  (Hachette Book Group, May 2021), strategy experts Daniel Kahneman and Olivier Sibony examine the unwanted variability in professional judgments and explain how to practice “decision hygiene.” Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras.  For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #54, May 12, 2021Don’t let the pandemic whittle away at the workforce. but some groups have suffered in unique ways. Working mothers, Asian Americans, and nurses are among those whose difficulties at work and at home—which for many is now the same stressful place—could result in a retreat from their careers. As employers prepare to emerge from the crisis, they must find creative ways to support the hardest-hit communities, which can require rethinking long-held beliefs. , a third of whom say they are considering leaving the workforce or downshifting their careers. One of the culprits is the double shift, the eternal burden of working mothers that has gotten worse during the COVID-19 crisis and is even more troubling for women of color (exhibit). Companies can help by providing emergency childcare and tutoring services, offering to continue remote work for those who want it, and revising hiring standards to eliminate the bias against gaps in employment. 
    
 revealed that 22 percent may leave their jobs providing direct patient care in the next year, a reflection of the physical and mental strain the pandemic has placed upon the profession. Employers should counteract this by improving in four key areas: providing more recognition, incentives, and breaks; offering flexible scheduling; finding opportunities for nurses to provide telemedicine services and other innovative patient-care delivery methods; and reskilling, so that nurses can keep up with technological advances.Asian Americans have long struggled for equality in the workplace, a fact reflected by their low representation in senior-level jobs relative to their representation in entry-level jobs. In a series of charts based on survey data from McKinsey’s latest  report, created in partnership with LeanIn.org, we explore the , concerning stress levels, engagement in work, and sense of opportunity. Solutions include promoting the practice of sponsorship and expanding workplace flexibility.McKinsey also looked at the US dairy industry’s tumultuous first pandemic year, which included milk dumping in April 2020 even as some store dairy cases sat empty. , revealed a sense of optimism combined with concern over changing consumer tastes. Best practices this year include being proactive about health and sustainability messaging, expanding the talent pool to include remote workers, and making supply chains more resilient.On , former Unilever CEO Paul Polman and McKinsey senior partner Dame Vivian Hunt discuss why, increasingly, the way for companies to deliver resilience, longevity, and growth is to build . The pandemic illustrated how expensive it is to let a health problem fester; companies should learn this lesson and apply it to broad social issues including the environment and diversity.Our  series features former Best Buy CEO and chairman Hubert Joly on his new book,  (Harvard Business Review Press, May 2021). Mr. Joly, who currently lectures at Harvard Business School, writes about what it means to lead with purpose and humanity. Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect Bengal tigers and king cobras.  For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #53, May 5, 2021How can we prepare the workforce for the postpandemic world? we learned to cope; in the postpandemic world, we need to learn to thrive. Companies emerging from the crisis are realizing that workforces require new capabilities to face the digital and environmental future. This week, McKinsey examined what industries should do to develop the talent and knowledge they need.To flourish during and after the pandemic, , including social and emotional, advanced cognitive, and digital capabilities. In a recent , 69 percent of respondents said that building the skills of existing staff is more important than any other method of talent building, including hiring (exhibit). It’s time for companies to strategize talent development and identify the most effective options, including digital learning and in-person workshops.
    
 by working harder and collaborating more on crisis management. Having found more effective ways to work together, directors and managers should build on the momentum by continuing to hold some meetings remotely, even when it is no longer required for health reasons, engaging in more formal and informal contact, and focusing on corporate resilience.. In the April McKinsey Global Survey on economic sentiment, 73 percent of respondents said they believe that conditions will improve in the next six months. The share of executives expecting conditions to worsen has shrunk by more than half in the past three months. Sentiment is most buoyant in North America and Greater China and most negative in India and Latin America, where the pandemic has recently taken a devastating toll.Meanwhile, workers may be too groggy to feel optimistic about anything. This edition of the , a quick look accompanied by , examines “,” in which nearly half of all workers surveyed report symptoms of burnout brought on by hybrid work.The world could gain a new seventh largest economy by 2030 if . McKinsey proposes ten ways to reignite Indonesia’s economy, including by investing in its healthcare system, adopting modern agricultural technologies, and promoting domestic tourism.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
     McKinsey examined thousands of companies’ greenhouse-gas-emissions disclosures and identified factors that contributed to success.
    , but to keep building, companies need to find more talent and get better at going to market.
     to take advantage of the digital transformation of healthcare. Patients, not products, need to be the new focus.
    , Western automakers must understand what the Chinese consumer wants.
Our most recent edition of  introduces younger audiences to mangrove forests and explains why building a “business case” for mangroves can help protect  Bengal tigers and King cobras. Our  series features Ohio State University professor Angus Fletcher on his new book, , about a neuroscience-based method of reading and teaching literature that reveals its power to inspire. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #52, April 28, 2021The pandemic is a fierce teacher, but how do we apply the lessons? the COVID-19 pandemic has changed consumer behavior, attitudes toward office work, and even some views about society itself. But knowing something and knowing what to do about it are two different things. This week, McKinsey looked across industries and sectors at how knowledge—increasingly, though not exclusively, generated by advanced-analytics technology—can be used to improve the way we tackle challenges.The pandemic reshaped what consumers buy and how they go about getting it. The challenge for consumer-packaged-goods companies is to  to be resilient enough to meet new consumer demands. Because each company is different, key first steps include identifying unique strengths and honing in on the most critical objectives (exhibit).
    
Among the most obvious pandemic takeaways: , and companies that want to lure workers back in will have to dangle more than a sterile “cube farm” and lukewarm office coffee. But for tenants, it’s not obvious how the future will play out in their office spaces, so owner/operators must take the lead, offering more flexible leasing models, redesigning layouts to accommodate hybrid work, and supplying a “wow factor.”The pandemic gave many business leaders practice in thinking about an external issue as a core concern. Stakeholder capitalism, similarly, asks business leaders to  as creating long-term value not only for shareholders but also for customers, suppliers, employees, communities, and others.  requires five steps, including identifying stakeholders, defining ways to serve them, and committing to a long-term outlook.Private markets experienced a year of disruption, starting with a “COVID correction” in the second quarter and followed by a K-shaped recovery that favored private equity and left real estate lagging. These are some of the insights found in the , a thorough analysis of the bumpy ride of 2020.Here are some other key findings from our sector research this week:
    , but use of this technology is underdeveloped. The field is held back by factors that include a lack of data scientists with oncology expertise. But companies that solve the biggest problem—a cultural tendency toward skepticism of analytics techniques—will move fastest in adopting these game-changing tools.
    Digital analytics have transformed nearly every part of how companies operate, except for the one that guides them all: strategy.  to help reduce bias, identify trends, and spot growth opportunities.
    As companies rebuild and restructure for the , they need to determine how and where to invest in new capabilities. , articulate the value in investing in them to C-suite leaders, and steer resources where they are most required.
    this week delves into that most complex of human relationships. No, not with Mom, the ex, nor the teenage offspring. Instead, Tera Allas, director of research and economics in McKinsey’s London office, , why working from home changed some dynamics, and how important it is to organizations for bosses to be better at the job. 
Business leaders crave new perspectives. In , a new feature, 72 Asian colleagues at McKinsey raise their voices and share their stories. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #51, April 21, 2021Now that the pandemic has changed us, what else needs to change? forced a sudden, new way of life upon the world, which scrambled for practical ways to adapt. This week, McKinsey looks at the less obvious, more fundamental ways in which the pandemic has forever altered us, revealing new priorities, capabilities, and outlooks.We examine how the pandemic created a new sense of . The crisis underscored domestic manufacturing’s role in providing critical health, safety, and national-security products as well as the sector’s need to invest, modernize, and revitalize the manufacturing process (exhibit).
    
In an , Dame Sally Davies describes how the COVID-19 pandemic provided a master course, through success and failure, on vaccine development, data deployment, and global collaboration. Dame Sally, the United Kingdom’s chief medical adviser for nine years and now the master of Trinity College, Cambridge, established the Trinity Challenge, a coalition of leaders dedicated to preparing for future health emergencies.McKinsey provides much-needed comic relief in  by two lecturers at Stanford’s Graduate School of Business. They identify humor as the key to connecting with colleagues, now that a pandemic and screens stand in the way. Their online course and new book make a case for why being a better leader today requires lightening up and having a few laughs.Other key findings from our sector research this week:
    In this , we examine ten key factors contributing to the inequality these workers experience.
    Our latest edition of the  draws up a contradiction: the companies that most prioritize  have nearly double the revenues of their peers, but less than 10 percent of McKinsey survey respondents said their firms have reached their full design potential. This quick read—with optional deep dives—examines how to maximize design’s potential for growth.
    
    Fintech start-ups are nipping at banking incumbents, but an active,  response can turn the tables. The article provides specific examples of big banks, including Goldman Sachs and State Bank of India, which successfully broke the status quo with new initiatives.
    The Fourth Industrial Revolution means that  predict and manage employee attendance, skill matching, and turnover. Our authors explain how using these tools can boost productivity and earnings by double-digit percentages.
    A recent episode of  asks, “?” Elizabeth Young McNally, a global leader of the McKinsey Academy, and Matthew Smith, McKinsey’s chief learning officer, discuss how to build “muscle” for adopting new skills. Put their ideas into practice with the , McKinsey’s heuristic for creating goals and the accountability to achieve them.
Business leaders crave new perspectives. In , a new feature, 72 Asian colleagues at McKinsey raise their voices and share their stories—on what Asian identity means, what allies can do to support them, and how they are processing this moment. Our  series features two authors on how to make authentic connections: Communications consultant  discusses her new book about replacing superficial networking with the pursuit of genuine relationships, and , a former broadcast journalist and communications expert, talks about her book on making remote meetings effective.  For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #50, April 14, 2021No one is safe until we are all safe, so how can vaccine programs work for everyone? worldwide and manufacturing capacity that covers 85 percent of the world’s population, hope is surging. But getting vaccination right is multifaceted, with abundant opportunities for missteps, and complicated by variants that can throw even the best-oiled system into disarray. this week features senior partners Lieven Van der Veken and Tania Zulu Holt outlining what we’ve learned so far about a . Each country’s program is , and the challenge is making sure a weakness in one area doesn’t delay or derail everything else. A key question countries face is how to inspire popular acceptance of the vaccine. The answer? Perhaps another Elvis, who played a role in promoting the polio vaccine in the 1950s. can also play a key role in the quest for herd immunity. In a recent McKinsey survey of more than 400 US-based companies, over 40 percent of employees said they would be significantly more likely to get the vaccine if their employers helped them do it. Paid time off to get vaccinated was the most popular incentive, but information and appointment help also rated high.Such efforts are not just niceties, as this exhibit illustrates. If new variants take hold, US herd immunity will not occur if the populations that describe themselves as either “cautious” or “unlikely” abstain.
    
We looked into which sectors will benefit from a rebound in consumer spending, including the  arena, a $1.5 trillion market growing at 5 to 10 percent per year. The  takes a deep dive into the post-COVID-19 world of shopping, where the tech-enabled “store of the future” can double retailers’ earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) margins. The catch? Retailers need to make plans for the “” future now, or get left behind. For a look at how a century-old fashion firm is preparing, see  with Tiger of Sweden’s CEO.Other key findings from our sector research this week:
    This study proposes a , in which companies locate second headquarters or branches in places where more Black people live. The seldom-used strategy addresses one of the .
    In the , we explore how the pandemic pushed boards to meet more frequently and confront crises—while warding off groupthink.
    STEM-oriented, digitally capable employees have lots of job choices these days, which is a headwind for aerospace and defense companies. The sector can  through partnerships and diversity-hiring practices.
    Companies need to rethink how they view  and  retool their businesses piece by piece to bring climate change goals and dollars into line.
Business leaders crave new perspectives. In , a new feature, 72 Asian colleagues at McKinsey raise their voices and share their stories—on what Asian identity means, what allies can do to support them, and how they are processing this moment. Our  series features top Hollywood voice and dialect coach  discussing her new book on how to use breath and vocal variety and color for better communication. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Katy McLaughlin, a senior editor in the Southern California office.COVID-19: Briefing note #49, April 7, 2021In the new world of work, which are the ties that bind? many companies plan to combine remote work with time in the office to get the best mix of productivity and collaboration. But with employees feeling anxious and burned out, getting the balance of the new hybrid model right is critical. We surveyed 5,000 employees to find out  and summarized the findings in a dozen charts. Here’s an important one: any communication helps a little, but detailed information on policies and plans helps much more (exhibit).
    
Along with employee burnout and anxiety has come a lot of soul-searching. After a year of the COVID-19 pandemic, people are reexamining and remaking every part of their lives, especially their jobs. In another survey, we found that more than 70 percent of employees say that their  is defined by their work. Companies that ignore this do so at their peril because employees also say that if their job doesn’t give them purpose, they’ll leave for one that will.This week, we looked into the next normal for several sectors, starting with . Leisure trips will fuel the recovery, but it won’t be easy or quick. As senior partner Alex Dichter explains in a companion , the industry could take on as much as $1.1 trillion in new debt by 2024. A successful return to profit will depend on its ability to restructure, raise equity, and invest for growth.Other key findings from our sector research this week:
    For automakers and other  companies, the future will be clean, connected, and electric.
     will also be affected. The industry has thrived by offering well-stocked convenience stores. Now, forecourt owners will need to add new lines, including electric-vehicle charging.
    The resumption of the credit cycle will offer new opportunities in .
    Eat your own cooking:  companies make the chips that make artificial intelligence (AI) possible, and can benefit by applying AI to their own operations.
    Every industry is moving to the cloud—but not all will succeed. The  forecast is “.”
We were pleased to speak with two notable industry leaders this week. John Waldron of Goldman Sachs discussed  with global managing partner Kevin Sneader and senior partner Carolyn Dewar. And Twilio CEO Jeff Lawson talked about how to close the communication gaps between business leaders and software developers in a  with senior partner Paul Roche and partner Shivam Srivastava.Business leaders crave new perspectives. In , a new feature, 72 Asian colleagues at McKinsey raise their voices and share their stories—on what Asian identity means, what allies can do to support them, and how they are processing this moment. Our  series features the writers of the best new business books; in this week’s edition,  talks about power moms. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #48, March 31, 2021It’s year two of the COVID-19 crisis. What comes next? WHO declared a global pandemic. Through a long and dismal year, McKinsey has  the development of COVID-19 and its devastation and disruption. Today, we mark the milestone with a set of new reports and articles that look ahead with considerable optimism to the second year of the pandemic.Public health is still the chief concern. In the latest installment of our perspectives on , we see progress toward normalcy during the second quarter of 2021 in the United Kingdom and the United States and herd immunity in the third quarter (Exhibit 1). The new wave of cases in the European Union means that these transitions are likely to come later. But new variants of the coronavirus and other risks threaten that timeline.
    
New US COVID-19 cases rose sharply in late 2020 and, until recently, declined nearly as steeply during the first few months of 2021. This pattern is similar to that of other respiratory viruses in the winter months, but in this case, many are not sure precisely why it has happened. One unexplored factor may be at work: the different patterns of human interactions. Some  much more than others, but most epidemiological models don’t account for that.The global economy has rebounded from the lows of 2020 (stock markets have too, though in ), but its future direction is hazy, even by the standards of economic forecasting. Throughout the crisis, we have offered two essential tools for business leaders to plot a course; this month, we updated both of them. In April 2020, we  a set of nine scenarios as part of our economic model and  thousands of global business executives about their economic outlook. Our latest  finds greater optimism about the economy and corporate prospects than at any time since the crisis began—and on a few fronts, more than in the past several years (Exhibit 2). Still, weak demand continues to threaten corporate growth, and the pandemic remains the biggest risk to growth in respondents’ countries. See our interactives about the scenarios and the surveys .
    
Productivity has long been a weak spot in global growth, but the crisis might have kick-started a rise in productivity. As companies shifted rapidly to online channels, automated production tasks, increased operational efficiency, and sped up decision making and innovation of operating models, productivity also rose—and more growth may be in store. New McKinsey Global Institute  finds that there is potential to accelerate annual productivity growth by about one percentage point in the period to 2024. The stakes are high. One percentage point of additional productivity growth per year in every country to 2024 would imply an increase in per capita GDP ranging from about $1,500 in Spain to about $3,500 in the United States.How do companies find the extra gear needed for a sustained burst in productivity? As our researchers suggest,  but also chills: companies need to work through five critical questions in the next few months to lock in the speed of the pandemic response in a way that does not wreck mental health or cause employees to burnout. According to a McKinsey survey, productivity is up for about half of all workers, with the other half reporting no change or lower productivity. Tilting that balance will be vital.Also this week: The McKinsey Podcast listened in on the  (it’s sweatpants today, but tomorrow will be different). And our industry researchers took a look at  in the new reality and the path forward for .Business leaders crave new perspectives. In , a new feature, 72 Asian colleagues at McKinsey raise their voices and share their stories—on what Asian identity means, what allies can do to support them, and how they are processing this moment. Our  series features the writers of the best new business books; in this week’s edition,  speaks on making money moral. For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #47, March 24, 2021After a year when consumers did everything differently, what changes will stick? has changed: it’s a truism of COVID-19 analysis. What’s missing is a sense of what behaviors have changed for good and what are likely to revert to prepandemic norms. A new  from the McKinsey Global Institute offers a view: e-grocery shopping is here to stay, while remote learning for primary grades could be headed for the dustbin of history. We devised a “stickiness” index (or, if we’re being academic, a gauge of behavior plasticity) to assess all the big shifts of 2020 (exhibit).
    
This week, we spoke with two prominent executives about what’s stuck with them from their pandemic experience. Chris Kempczinski, CEO of McDonald’s,  with senior partner Greg Kelly about how the company has worked hard to stay relevant. For a restaurant chain in the crisis, that means excelling at delivery; McDonald’s expanded the number of its locations offering delivery to more than 30,000. Leena Nair, chief human-resources officer of Unilever, shared her  about 150,000 employees with senior partner Mary Meaney and executive editor Astrid Sandoval. For those in the workforce wondering when 2020’s pace of work might relent, here’s one encouraging sign: Nair says, “This speed is unsustainable.” Also this week, our industry researchers examined the potential for , the ecosystem opportunity for , and the pleasant surprises  have discovered as they adapted to online sales. Finally, in the pandemic, many of us have spent more time with our children than we used to, and we’ve learned from them. In our new edition of , we attempt to return the favor by taking a look at the food distribution system and food waste. Please share it with your young people, and let us know what they think. Business leaders crave new perspectives. Check out our series of , which features the writers of the best new business books. This week’s additions to the series include  on the next frontier in racial equality and  on how to frame ambition (and not let it frame you). For more perspectives, please see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #46, March 17, 2021In 2020, consumer goods and retail were shaken. What will it take to return to stirring performance? in an orderly fashion. But for consumer goods and retail, a year like no other meant that the future showed up early, and in an ugly mood. In March 2020, COVID-19 shut down retail locations across the world, forcing consumers to change their buying behaviors, and as a consequence, these two sectors may never be the same again.Two new reports look at the changes wrought by COVID-19 in the United States and assess their long-term effects. In , we examine four effects on demand and costs. Demand has proved highly variable and may remain so for some time; company performance has been all over the map, even within the same category; growth soared in 2020, and large companies captured a big chunk of it (exhibit); and most costs will likely remain higher in 2021.
    
In , our research with the Retail Industry Leaders Association finds that success in a post-COVID-19 world will require hastened progress on four long-standing imperatives and three new strategies that will be increasingly critical in coming years. Consider one of the older yet still fundamental challenges: the shift to omnichannel, led by digital shopping. Our survey reveals that 65 percent of retailers base decisions about their store network on brick-and-mortar performance, without considering how changes might affect omnichannel. In a world where consumers pick their retailers based on digital offerings, that’s a recipe for irrelevance.This week, the  returned for its . The pandemic made clear that the technology imperative is stronger than ever. One key finding: more than half of respondents said that technology transformations have lifted revenues, reduced costs, and improved employee experiences in the past two years.Finally this week, new research in operations finds that “”—leading-edge manufacturing sites—are demonstrating that the benefits of an infusion of digital can go beyond mere productivity to create a higher base for future growth. A new report from our organizational researchers examines how  can build the organization of the future; our corporate-finance experts look at the state of ; and  talks through what it will take to build .With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection of reports on the next normal, which are a product of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC. Our report collection includes a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change, and a 202-page  on reimagining operational resilience.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #45, March 10, 2021After a year of COVID-19, women in the workplace want out, and companies seek growth in all directions. from last year’s Women in the Workplace : 77 percent of men think they share the load at home equally with their partners, while just 40 percent of women agree. Sounds like the guys have some “splainin” to do. Given that imbalance, and the enormous burden (three hours a day, or more) that COVID-19 has added to women’s workload, it may be less surprising that one-quarter of women in corporate America are thinking about leaving. Senior partners Alexis Krivkovich and Lareina Yee dig into the details, in the latest  of . And our  to International Women’s Day charts the impact to date and hints at the way forward.This week, McKinsey’s  looked at a different kind of exit: the shift that companies need to make as COVID-19 fades and the next normal takes hold. Senior partner Martin Hirt and partner Anna Koivuniemi  how, with all signs pointing toward a significant, possibly historic economic rebound, companies need to pull out all the stops. Our research shows that outperformers seek growth in every dimension: core expansion, geographic, up and down the value chain, and in adjacent spaces.Regarding that rebound: stock markets seem to have embraced the possibilities. Our latest  reviews the four acts of the 2020 stock-market drama (interactive). What comes next is anybody’s guess. But the “Mega 25,” which reeled in 40 percent of total public market gains in 2020, will have much to say about future developments.

	




    
    

Also this week, our industry researchers investigated the potential for  to unleash digital attackers and surveyed consumers on : autos, both gas and electric powered; trucks; and autonomous vehicles.With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection of reports on the next normal, which are a product of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC. Our report collection includes a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change, and a 202-page  on reimagining operational resilience.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #44, March 3, 2021This week in McKinsey research: online learning has underwhelmed. Vaccine development, however, is on pace for a surprising milestone. have different styles and standards for learning, there is one thing on which they seem to agree: a computer is no match for a classroom as a place for kids to learn. We asked teachers in eight countries to rate  between March and July of 2020. They gave it an average score of five out of ten (Exhibit 1). The grades were especially harsh from teachers in Japan and the United States, where nearly 60 percent rated the effectiveness of remote learning at between one and three out of ten. That barely beats skipping school altogether. While the quality and support systems around remote learning have likely improved since then, this is still a striking indictment.
    
Reopening schools depends in part on COVID-19-vaccine development, manufacturing, and distribution. In our , if all clinical trials succeed, and if manufacturing commitments to scale up production hold true, more than 14 billion doses could be produced by the end of the year (Exhibit 2). Since most vaccines require two shots, that’s enough to vaccinate nearly 80 percent of the global population.
    
That said, there’s a lot of green between the ball and the pocket: new variants of concern have emerged; not all populations have equitable access to supplies; and technology transfer at the required scale is complex and far from assured.These challenges also worry business leaders seeking the next normal. We recently surveyed 300 European senior executives to understand their  and find out what was working best. One critical finding was that business-model innovation was by far the most important strategic lever. Almost 90 percent of the successful companies said that new digital experiences, new partnerships, faster product development, and other changes to the business model had made them more effective.This week, our diversity and inclusion researchers produced two new reports. In the first, we consider , which we hope serves to highlight the scale of the issues facing Black workers and leads to better understanding of the challenges they face, thereby galvanizing action for system-level change and better and scaled solutions. In the second, we look closely at , in which gender and racial diversity are stronger in entry-level positions than in more senior roles. One idea for asset managers to consider: diversity assessments of investment targets, to assess risk and to understand the value-creation opportunity from improving diversity, equity, and inclusion.Finally, the new  of the  looks at healthcare, where ten promising innovations might speed effective responses to future pandemics and health crises.With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection of reports on the next normal, which are a product of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC. Our report collection includes a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change, and a 202-page  on reimagining operational resilience.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #43, February 19, 2021The pandemic has hit America hard. Our new #America2021 series looks at how the country can recover. is always a time for the country to reflect and reset. The 2021 transition is much more than that; given the once-in-a-century pandemic, it is a watershed moment. This week, we published a  offering our latest perspectives on four issues confronting the country and how public- and private-sector leaders could organize to drive change on them. Will 2021 be the year in which the United States gains a decisive upper hand in its fight against the pandemic? We argue that it is reasonable to hope that the first half of the year could be a bridge to “normalcy,” when many aspects of social and economic life can resume without fear of excess mortality. This  condenses the recent history of the COVID-19 crisis into must-see charts and sets out six considerations for those building bridges to normalcy. For America’s leaders, innovators, and changemakers, the post–World War II recovery offers valuable lessons for encouraging productivity, innovation, and social-capital creation in a post-COVID-19 future. Global managing partner Kevin Sneader and senior partner Shubham Singhal  the good policies, political commitment, and hard work that will be needed to replicate those successes.
 Repairing the frayed social fabric in the United States is not a new problem. But as the civil unrest of 2020 showed, it has become increasingly urgent. Our experts contribute  for all races and the impact, in particular, of higher Black participation in different roles in the economy—a goal that the pandemic has set back. The global transition to a low-carbon economy is well underway. In the United States, 23 states have established emission-reduction goals, and 12 have instituted carbon-pricing policies. Making good on those intentions will require new information, products, operations, and market innovations from public officials and business leaders. Our experts  of McKinsey’s decades of research to the task. To make all this happen, public-sector leaders will need to move swiftly and decisively, bringing the whole of government to bear across all four priorities, even as they revitalize a federal workforce with plummeting morale and lack of trust in government leadership. In the final memo of the series, we  from successful government-change programs in a set of tactical ideas for leaders to consider.Also this week, the McKinsey Global Institute published the first of three reports that examine the postpandemic economy. In , we assess the lasting impact of the pandemic on labor demand, the mix of occupations, and the workforce skills required in eight countries with diverse economic and labor-market models: China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Our research concludes that because of the pandemic, up to 25 percent more workers than previously estimated may need to switch occupations.With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection of reports on the next normal, which are a product of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC. Our report collection includes a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change, and a 202-page  on reimagining operational resilience.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #42, February 10, 2021From lab to jab: How will the world ship vaccine doses to those in need? Our latest logistics research takes a look. have been announced by manufacturers for release in 2021, subject to successful clinical trials. The earth’s population is 7.8 billion. Coverage for a first dose seems adequate, until you consider the logistics. Manufacturing is concentrated in a handful of countries; regions without manufacturing must import the vaccine (exhibit).
    
Our new  looks into the considerable obstacles blocking these flows, including the need for ultracold supply chains, lack of air-cargo capacity, and counterfeiting. What’s needed is collective action on an unprecedented scale among manufacturers, governments, customs authorities, and others.Some countries, such as the United Kingdom, are equipped with adequate vaccine manufacturing to meet domestic needs. But the United Kingdom faces other problems, such as the plight of small and medium-size businesses, which we  in June 2020. Our  shows that on many measures, life is getting better for these companies. But many are still dependent on government support, and anxious about what comes next.Companies everywhere are reckoning with the first-order effects of the pandemic and trying to anticipate those of the second order. In this week’s  of the  podcast, our experts help you get out in front of the changes in middle management. Faster, flatter, leaner: companies have been trying for decades to thin their ranks. But amid the challenges of the pandemic, middle managers can still make valuable contributions, in new ways.Stock markets seem to have established their own form of herd immunity. This week, marking the 50th anniversary of Nasdaq, senior partner Vijay D’Silva and executive editor Roberta Fusaro  with Nasdaq CEO Adena Friedman about how markets are staying relevant, and partner Tim Koller  on how markets should be more inclusive, share more information, inspire innovation, and bring the world together.Also new this week, we explored the  of future-ready companies, tracked down a winning formula for  companies, and  with the new CEO of NXP Semiconductors.Finally, we conclude Our New Future, a series of management discussions in partnership with CNBC; our final topic is . Senior partner Katy George leads the discussion, joined by Arvind Krishna, CEO of IBM. One essential insight: resiliency isn’t a lever to be pulled; rather, it’s a combination of actions, technologies, and strategies that companies work on every day.With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection of reports on the next normal, which are a product of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC. Our report collection includes a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change, and a 202-page  on reimagining operational resilience.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19: Briefing note #41, February 3, 2021Executives still feel positive about the economy, advanced industrial companies are plotting their exit from the pandemic, and more. to dominate global economic sentiment. In our newest  of more than a thousand executives from all industries, the outlook is still positive, though not quite as strong as in early December 2020 (exhibit). Majorities of executives continue to believe that conditions in their home economies and in the global economy will improve over the next six months.
    
We also ask leaders about their home countries. The story there is mixed. Sentiment in India is up and is nearly as positive as it is in China. But in Asia–Pacific and Europe, the share of executives that is optimistic fell by double digits. And in Latin America, just 30 percent are optimistic, the lowest figure globally.Advanced industrials companies are among the world’s largest—and those most affected by the pandemic. Worldwide, these firms (including advanced electronics, aerospace and defense, and automotive and assembly companies) employ almost 25 million people and generate about $9.3 trillion in annual revenue. The crisis has hurt sales, margins, and growth. In our new comprehensive , we outline ten actions that industrials can take to undo the damage and pivot to a postcrisis future. Among the ideas: take advantage of the stunning developments in e-commerce. Companies that embed digital sales into their marketing models see five-times-faster revenue growth compared with previous levels, as well as 30 percent higher acquisition efficiency and cost reductions of 40 to 60 percent within sales.Our researchers continue to track the long-running crisis of our time: climate change. In a new report, we address the potential for . Some companies need carbon credits to offset emissions they can’t get rid of by other means. Others might have credits to sell. But carbon markets have a mixed track record. To build a better one, buyers, sellers, and a few other stakeholders need to come together. Our research for the , led by Mark Carney and Bill Winters, explains what’s needed. And in this week’s  of the , McKinsey experts discuss what can be done to truly decarbonize global business at scale.Also new this week, we outline a new portfolio model for ; consider the potential for “smart quality” assurance in ; and share tips for  to unlock diversity and inclusion. Finally, we are pleased to  with Richard N. Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, about his new book The World: A Brief Introduction (Penguin Press, May 2020), in the latest installment of .With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection The Next Normal: The Recovery Will Be Digital. The first four installments—a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, and a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change—are available now. The final installment is coming as part of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19 and the great reset: Briefing note #40, January 27, 2021Vaccine rollout has run into problems. Our new research explores where and why. intently continues to examine the progress of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine development and distribution. Last week, we updated our series on the  to consider the emergence of new strains of the virus and a slow start to vaccine rollout. Both represent serious threats to the timetable. This week, we looked more closely at the problems in vaccine distribution. We start by mapping the operating path, from raw materials to post-vaccination care (interactive). At every step,  are emerging. But so too are collaborative approaches that can help countries achieve herd immunity.

	




    
    

The pandemic has been a tough, real-life stress test for government disbursement schemes, highlighting not only opportunities but also gaps and vulnerabilities. Our new  across 12 countries shows both. One key finding: getting aid to those who need it is greatly bolstered by digital payment channels, a basic digital identification system used by most people, and simple data on individuals and businesses that are tethered to that digital ID.Gone but not forgotten: in the crisis, global CO emissions briefly plunged, then resumed. Today, as economies rebuild, the climate challenge is again top of mind. For a new report published this week, we teamed up with the World Economic Forum (WEF) to examine . Simply put, these are techniques to increase carbon storage and avoid emissions—through better conservation, restoration, and management of our priceless natural resources. There is no clear path to mitigate the damaging effects of climate change that doesn’t include natural climate solutions. The case is complete when you consider the urgent need to slow the destruction of the natural world. (We’re also collaborating with WEF on the , the first of two events being held in place of its usual annual meeting.)Also this week, we looked at , the greatly exaggerated rumor of the  in Japan, the dramatic shifts in  over the past year, and the rising value of .With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection The Next Normal: The Recovery Will Be Digital. The first four installments—a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, and a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change—are available now. The final installment is coming as part of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19 and the great reset: Briefing note #39, January 20, 2021Asia is at an inflection point. New research looks at developments in industrial technology, renewables, travel, ASEAN’s vast human capital, and China’s education system. the largest health and economic crisis in recent history forced companies across sectors into extraordinary measures to protect their people and maintain operations. Did the technologies of the ongoing Fourth Industrial Revolution (or Industry 4.0) help? Our new  of industrial companies (two-thirds in Asia) suggests three outcomes, starting with a huge win for companies that had already scaled digital technologies (exhibit). Those that were still scaling faced a reality check, and 2020 was a wake-up call for those that hadn’t yet started on their Industry 4.0 journeys.
    
Other technologies are also changing life in Asia. While coal is expected to remain a significant component of India’s energy mix, the country is placing big bets on renewable power, which could make up nearly half of the global total electricity capacity by 2035. Among the biggest believers is Sumant Sinha of ReNew Power. Our interview  why renewables are different in Asia.Our 2020  offered a perspective on the coming rebound in travel: how far, how fast, and where. Now, in an  with McKinsey, the president of online travel unicorn Traveloka explains the nuts and bolts of the rebound. The critical moves for this company? Giving a thousand employee-volunteers the tools they needed to help customers with more than 150,000 refund requests; extending credit to strapped customers who were having trouble saving for their big trip; and thinking about the local market beyond the big beach destinations popular with international tourists.For many people, those beaches are a major part of the allure of ASEAN countries, along with sunshine, great food, and history. But as our recent  shows, there is more to ASEAN than just that, and now is a good time to rethink ASEAN and its 650 million people, $3 trillion economy, ten countries, and history of robust growth: 5 percent over the past 20-plus years. In the latest , our experts delve into the question of whether ASEAN can maintain that track record after the difficult challenges of COVID-19. Short answer: yes, if the region can harness its extraordinary resources.Across Asia, and the world, work is changing as digitization and automation spread. Hundreds of millions of people may need to raise and refresh their skills; some may need to change occupations. Up to one-third of these transitions may be needed in China. If China gets this right, it could establish a helpful reference point to other economies. The McKinsey Global Institute’s new  looks at the skills revolution that the country needs to keep raising its standard of living.Also this week, our researchers looked at , the next wave of , lessons from the fastest growing companies in , and the potential for .With vaccinations underway, executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection The Next Normal: The Recovery Will Be Digital. The first four installments—a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, and a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change—are available now. The final installment is coming as part of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19 and the great reset: Briefing note #38, January 13, 2021The COVID-19 crisis wrenched energy demand from its growth trajectory and workers from their cubicles. What happens next? we stopped driving, flying, commuting. And we stopped buying the fuel needed to do these things. Today, even as economies have restarted, fuel demand remains subdued. McKinsey’s Global Energy Perspective 2021, an annual report,  the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic has permanently shifted energy-demand curves. Demand is likely to return to 2019 levels within one to four years, with electricity and gas rebounding fastest (Exhibit 1). But we do not foresee a return to the previous trajectory of growth in demand.

	




    
    

In the longer term, the energy transition—already underway before 2020—will accelerate. Power consumption doubles by 2050 as energy demand electrifies, wealth increases, and green hydrogen picks up momentum. Oil demand peaks in 2029; gas, in 2037. But fossil fuels continue to play a major role in the energy system in 2050. Our  modeling helps you understand all the twists and turns.With workforces now located in kitchens, basements, and attics, what will happen to all those sleek urban office towers and their glossy suburban counterparts? The answer has to start with their current tenants. Our latest survey of CXOs, which focused on , finds that most companies are intensely debating the issues raised by COVID-19’s work-from-home experiment, and many companies are planning substantial shifts in the next three to nine months (Exhibit 2). In the short term, 70 percent of corporate-center executives plan to reconfigure office space, as do 54 percent of business-unit leaders. Over the midterm, 30 percent of corporate centers want to terminate existing leases early, compared with 14 percent of business units. Finally, as they look to the longer term, 55 percent of corporate centers plan to shift toward fewer and lower-cost locations. Business heads showed more willingness to stay put.
    
In a crisis, it’s all hands on deck. Bank tellers are becoming financial advisors; fresh-faced managers are leading enormous projects; and companies are intently searching for people with the aptitude to become data analysts and mobile web designers. In this month’s edition of the McKinsey Quarterly Five Fifty, we document the trend underpinning it all: .Also this week, we researched the long-term effects of the pandemic on , explained the  to becoming a future-ready company, and considered the long-run implications of 2020 on .Executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection The Next Normal: The Recovery Will Be Digital. The first four installments—a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, and a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change—are available now. The final installment is coming as part of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.COVID-19 and the great reset: Briefing note #37, January 6, 2021One year ends, another begins. From disruption to transition, McKinsey research traces the pandemic’s arc. 2021 is likely to be the year when the world transitions to the next normal. As executives take stock of what’s just happened, and what’s to come, they won’t go far wrong by considering the ten trends that authors Kevin Sneader and Shubham Singhal  and the effects of those trends on the global economy, business, and society. First up in the next normal: “revenge shopping” as many consumers open their wallets for goods and services they’ve done without recently. Other trends to ponder—none traditionally associated with recessions—include startling growth in the number of new businesses, an incredible rise in productivity, permanent changes in consumer behavior, and the “bio revolution,” which may soon create different mechanisms of production for 60 percent of the global economy’s physical inputs. One thing’s for sure: 2022 won’t look anything like 2019.Our recent survey of global executives focused on the here and now: even in the short term, optimism is growing. Our December 2020  of global executives detected the highest levels of optimism since the COVID-19 pandemic began (exhibit). Executives in Europe, North America, and developing markets report concerns more acute than others did; those in Europe, for example, remain especially worried about unemployment. But even these respondents are less downbeat than they were in the previous quarter. Looking ahead, the respondents’ expectations for their home economies are increasingly positive: 61 percent say global economic conditions will be better six months from now, up from 51 percent in mid-October.
    
The United States is the global economy’s linchpin; it’s no surprise that the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines there is under intense scrutiny. Our latest research details five challenges to at-scale vaccine adoption. Chief among these: consumer skepticism. According to our most recent US consumer research, 63 percent of respondents are cautious about the vaccines or unlikely to be vaccinated. The antidote? Conviction, convenience, and costlessness. If the 100 million Americans who are uncertain about the COVID-19 vaccine can be brought around through a combination of education, easy access, and affordability, the benefits will be enormous. We  that new investment of about $12 billion, in addition to current programs, could bring forward the pandemic’s end by three to six months and generate an additional $800 billion to $1.2 trillion in US GDP.Also this week, our industry researchers examined four topics: consumers’ uptake of  offerings, the resilience imperative for  supply chains, , and the future of .Finally, we closed the books on 2020 by offering three summaries of a difficult, often desperate, and, yes, disruptive year:  of our publishing, including our top ten, insights from the McKinsey Quarterly and the McKinsey Global Institute, and editors’ picks; a tale of 2020 in ; and, similarly, the  that helped us tell the visual story of a remarkable time. Thank you for reading, and best wishes for a better new year.Executives everywhere are thinking about the critical next months of the pandemic. Start with the  to find McKinsey’s latest research, perspectives, and insights on the management issues that matter most, from leading through the COVID-19 crisis to managing risk and digitizing operations. Also consider our special collection The Next Normal: The Recovery Will Be Digital. The first four installments—a 172-page  on technology and data transformation, a 130-page  on the path to true transformation, a 206-page  on reimagining the postpandemic organization, and a 157-page  on the challenge of climate change—are available now. The final installment is coming as part of Our New Future, a multimedia series we created with CNBC.You can also see the full  of our coronavirus-related content, visual insights from our “,” a curated collection of our  related to the coronavirus, our  to help leaders respond to the pandemic, and how our editors choose  that help readers visualize the impact of an invisible threat.This briefing note was edited by Mark Staples, an executive editor in the New York office.For McKinsey’s , visit our archive of several dozen briefing notes published throughout the year. 