
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    NHS Constitution for England
  

  
  

  
    
  The principles and values of the NHS in England, and information on how to make a complaint about NHS services.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department of Health and Social Care

      
      Published
      8 March 2012
      Last updated
      
        1 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    The NHS Constitution for England
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    NHS complaints guidance
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

As a result of the EU Exit transition period ending on 31 December 2020, the rules changed regarding UK residents’ access to healthcare in the EU, Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland.

From autumn 2021 new agreements have come into force and so the NHS Constitution for England will be updated.


The constitution sets out rights for patients, public and staff. It outlines NHS commitments to patients and staff, and the responsibilities that the public, patients and staff owe to one another to ensure that the NHS operates fairly and effectively. All NHS bodies and private and third sector providers supplying NHS services are required by law to take account of the constitution in their decisions and actions.

The constitution sets out a commitment for government to produce an up-to-date statement of NHS accountability to explain how decision-making works in the NHS. This is included in the ‘Guide to the Healthcare System in England’.

The complaints guidance explains how patients can give feedback or make a complaint about NHS care or treatment. It includes information on the NHS complaints arrangements, and what patients can expect when they make a complaint. The guidance should be read alongside the NHS Constitution.

The Department of Health has also produced supplements, including the NHS Constitution handbook, that explains in greater detail the rights and pledges contained in the constitution.



        
      

      
    Published 8 March 2012
    Last updated 1 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 January 2021
              Update to 'Access to health services' following EU Exit.
            
            
              14 October 2015
              Updated to include versions of the NHS constitution in easy read, large font and audio.
            
            
              27 July 2015
              Added updated NHS Constitution and updated Handbook to the NHS Constitution.
            
            
              11 February 2015
              NHS complaints guidance for patients added.
            
            
              1 August 2014
              Published an easy read version of the NHS constitution in England.
            
            
              26 March 2013
              Added updated NHS Constitution and updated Handbook to the NHS Constitution.
            
            
              8 March 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Handbook to the NHS Constitution for England
        NHS Constitution for England: easy reads
        Guide to the Healthcare System in England
        NHS Constitution for England: resources
        NHS Constitution: public health supplement

  




      

    Collection

  


        NHS Constitution for England: resources

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        National Health Service

  


  

  


    
  


    