
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pharmacovigilance of Veterinary Medicines in Great Britain
  

  
  

  
    
  Explanation of what Pharmacovigilance means and who is responsible.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Veterinary Medicines Directorate

      
      Published
      4 January 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Pharmacovigilance systems, including Risk management
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Compliance and Inspections
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Adverse event reporting
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Periodic safety update reports
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Post-authorisation safety studies
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Overall Pharmacovigilance Evaluation and Safety-Related Regulatory Action
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Glossary
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
What is pharmacovigilance

The World Health Organization has defined pharmacovigilance as the science and activities relating to the detection, assessment, understanding and prevention of adverse effects or any other medicine-related problem. This principle also applies to veterinary medicines.

Adverse effects may be undesirable side effects, such as adverse reactions, or a medicine may not work as expected, known as a lack of expected efficacy. The effects may be seen, for example, in the animal being treated, in other animals, the person handling the medicine or in the environment.

Veterinary pharmacovigilance legislation

Statutory Instrument 2013 Number 2033, the Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2013, hereinafter referred to as the VMR, sets out the legal framework for the pharmacovigilance of veterinary medicines in Great Britain (GB).

Although Part 8 of Schedule 1 of the VMR contains the majority of pharmacovigilance provisions in the legislation, you can find other requirements directly relevant to the conduct of pharmacovigilance in other Schedules and Parts of the VMR.

The pharmacovigilance obligations apply to all veterinary medicines authorised in the UK. This guidance document provides additional information and applies to all products authorised in Great Britain. All products authorised in Northern Ireland are required to follow the EU acquis and therefore should also follow the guidance set out in EudraLex Volume 9B.

Who is responsible for pharmacovigilance

The Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD) is the Competent Authority (CA) of the United Kingdom for veterinary pharmacovigilance. The VMR describes the obligation of Marketing Authorisation Holders (MAHs) for the establishment and maintenance of a pharmacovigilance system.

We will cooperate with MAHs, sharing all relevant information, so that all parties can continue to develop pharmacovigilance systems capable of achieving animal and public health protection, irrespective of the routes of authorisation of their veterinary medicines.

Intensive exchange of information between the MAH and the CA, as well as procedures to avoid duplication, whilst maintaining confidentiality, ensures the quality of the systems and data. Each MAH must ensure that it has an adequate pharmacovigilance system in place. Where appropriate, a risk management system must also be in place. This assures that the MAH takes responsibility and liability for its products on the market and can take appropriate action, when necessary.

We will continually check the safety profile of the veterinary medicines available on our territory, act where necessary, checking that MAHs fulfil their pharmacovigilance obligations. We are responsible for the pharmacovigilance of all UK-held veterinary medicine Marketing Authorisations (MAs) (this includes UK-wide, GB-only and NI-only MAs). MAHs are legally responsible for MAs held in the UK.

We use internationally agreed veterinary terminology, (VeDDRA) and other related terminology to exchange adverse event information with MAHs and other interested parties. You can find information about these terminologies on the website of the European Medicines Agency.

This guidance has been prepared by the VMD and is specifically related to pharmacovigilance concerning veterinary medicines. It should be noted that this guidance will be regularly reviewed and updated.




        
      

      
    Published 4 January 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pharmacovigilance information hub explainer
        Report a product defect: veterinary medicine
        Veterinary Pharmacovigilance responsibilities for authorisation holders

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    