
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Skill levels for digital, data and technology roles
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out about the skill levels that apply to role descriptions in the Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
For each job role level (for example, content designer, senior content designer, head of content) in the Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework, you will find a list of skills, each of which has a skill level assigned to it.

These 4 skill levels tell you about the level of expertise required for the job role at that level:


  
Awareness. You know about the skill and have an appreciation of how it is applied in the environment.
  
Working. You can apply your knowledge and experience of the skill, including tools and techniques. You can adopt those most appropriate for the environment.
  
Practitioner. You know how to share your knowledge and experience of this skill with others, including tools and techniques. You can define those most appropriate for the environment.
  
Expert. You have both knowledge and experience in the application of this skill. You are a recognised specialist and adviser in this skill including user needs, generation of ideas, methods and tools. You can lead or guide others in best-practice use.


Read more


  Civil Service jobs
  Capability Framework for the Digital, Data and Technology Profession





      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework
        Data analyst
        Interaction designer
        Delivery manager
        Data engineer

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    