The job market is  collected our best thinking on thriving in the workplace into a .“We had never done this before,” explains , a McKinsey executive editor. “Young people graduating from college or starting their first internship are now finding themselves in a very strange time, and we wanted to welcome them to the world of work with some helpful information.”The idea was hatched as many students were heading into finals and graduation season. In the spirit of the firm’s new agile publishing model, which has produced hundreds of  articles since March, the team pulled together the collection within 48 hours. “We went through all of the firm’s most popular insights content from the past few years, which includes hundreds of interviews with executives of well-known organizations,” Mike says. “The articles, videos, podcasts, and other material we’ve put together will be helpful to anyone entering the world of work for the first time.”, who heads the firm’s web-production team, organized the material and laid out the page, and designer  provided guidance on art. Our new manager of social-media content, , worked with  from our media services team to come up with a fun and creative  to promote the page on social platforms.The resulting collection includes 41 articles and 16 video interviews with leaders from organizations such as Girls Who Code, Pixar, Starbucks, and water.org. Some of the pieces cover pragmatic topics, such as making good decisions, running better meetings, managing time well, building great teams, and more. Other pieces, meanwhile, explore more theoretical questions: What is the meaning of work? What does it take to lead? How does your work contribute to society, and why does it matter?
A number of the pieces in the collection were published in our pre-pandemic past. All of them have been added to the guide for the way they can help new workers thrive in a post-pandemic future. For example,  offers a bird’s eye view of how these technologies will reshape the labor market over the next ten years. offers a vision of life and work after COVID-19. And  lays out sound advice for sleep, meditation, and time to read. 