Last month, the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) announced a $20 million funding opportunity to develop technology innovations that strengthen America’s water infrastructure and enable advanced water resource recovery systems that have the potential to be net energy positive. Projects selected under this Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA), issued by EERE’s , will explore the interconnected, cross-sector opportunities for technological innovation at the nexus of energy and water. View the , application, and submission requirements on EERE Exchange.Last month, DOE released the Energy Grand Storage Challenge Draft Roadmap and a Request for Information (RFI) seeking stakeholder input. The Draft Roadmap outlines a Department-wide strategy to accelerate innovation across a range of storage technologies based on three concepts: Innovate Here, Make Here, Deploy Everywhere. The Draft Roadmap also provides planned activities and use cases, which will be translated into a set of technology-neutral functional requirements. Responses to this RFI are due August 21, 2020. Interested stakeholders can view both the Draft Roadmap and the official RFI on the .DOE recently announced funding for $53.4 million in Phase II Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) projects. Phase II grants are competitively awarded to projects that demonstrate technical feasibility during Phase I. AMO will fund six selections totaling $6.75 million for technology innovations that improve energy efficiency, material productivity, and competitiveness for U.S. manufacturers. For more information, including the full list of selectees,  the AMO website.DOE’s  announced selections totaling up to $1.7 million for four projects that will advance innovation in smart manufacturing. The selected projects will create educational programs that support smart-manufacturing technologies, processes, and workforce development.Read the recent  to see the full list of selectees.DOE announced the latest cohorts in its three Lab-Embedded Entrepreneurship Programs: , , and . The 20 selected researchers will leverage the National Laboratories’ expert mentorship and world-class facilities over the next two years to advance their energy and manufacturing technologies from concepts to products.View  on the AMO website and meet the newest innovators to join the program.DOE announced the winners of the first phase of competition for the . Launched in January 2020, the Water Resource Recovery Prize accelerates resource recovery from municipal wastewater across the United States. In this two-phased competition, DOE seeks novel, systems-based solutions from multidisciplinary teams at small- to medium-sized water resource recovery facilities (WRRFs). Projects selected during phase one will move into phase two, in which up to two teams will be selected to receive $250,000 cash prizes. Read the  to see the full list of selectees.The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) announced the launch of the Innovations in Advanced Manufacturing for Hydropower (I AM Hydro) Prize, a new competition designed to transform the hydropower industry using advanced manufacturing technology. Part of the  series, the I AM Hydro Prize solicits advanced manufacturing solutions to hydropower generation in any form, including joining, coating, and repair; additive and composite manufacturing; casting, forming, and machining; and advanced materials. Visit the  to learn more, and submit your concepts before September 30, 2020.