
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Data architect
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what a data architect does and the skills you need to do the job.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of data architect

        
        
          Data architect

        
        
          Senior data architect

        
        
          Chief data architect

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This describes the role of a data architect and the skills required, including:


  an introduction to the role, telling you what you would do in this role and the full list of skills
  a description of the levels in this role, from data architect to chief data architect, specifying the skills you need for each level and the corresponding skill level (awareness, working, practitioner, expert)


This role is part of the Digital, Data and Technology Profession in the Civil Service.

Introduction to the role of data architect

A data architect sets the vision for the organisation’s use of data, through data design, to meet business needs.

Skills required to be a data architect

You will need the following skills for this role, although the level of expertise for each will vary, depending on the role level.


  
Communication skills (data). You can communicate effectively across organisational, technical and political boundaries, understanding the context. You make complex and technical information and language simple and accessible for non-technical audiences. You can advocate and communicate what a team does to create trust and authenticity, and can respond to challenge.
  
Data analysis and synthesis. You can translate data into valuable insights that inform decisions. You involve teams in analytics and synthesis to increase consensus and challenge assumptions. You can identify and use the most appropriate analytical techniques, and you have an understanding of analytical tools. You are numerate. You are aware of and keep up to date with advances in digital analytics tools and data manipulation products. You collect, collate, cleanse, synthesise and interpret data to derive meaningful and actionable insights.
  
Data communication. You use the most appropriate medium to visualise data to tell compelling and actionable stories relevant for business goals. You present, communicate and disseminate data appropriately and with high impact.
  
Data governance. You understand data governance and how it works in relation to other organisational governance structures. You participate in or deliver the assurance of a service.
  
Data innovation. You recognise and exploit business opportunities to ensure more efficient and effective performance of organisations. You explore new ways of conducting business and organisational processes.
  
Data modelling. You can produce data models and understand where to use different types of data models. You understand different tools and can compare between different data models. You can reverse-engineer a data model from a live system. You understand industry-recognised data-modelling patterns and standards.
  
Data standards. You can develop and set data standards for an organisation. You can communicate the business benefit of data standards, championing and governing those standards across the organisation.
  
Metadata management. You understand a variety of metadata management tools. You can design and maintain the appropriate metadata repositories to enable the organisation to understand their data assets.
  
Problem resolution (data). You log, analyse and manage problems in order to identify and implement the appropriate solution. You ensure that the problem is fixed.
  
Strategic thinking (data architecture). You have an overall perspective on business issues, events and activities, and an understanding of their wider implications and long-term impact. This could include determining patterns, standards, policies, roadmaps and vision statements. You focus on outcomes rather than solutions and activities.
  
Turning business problems into data design. You can work with business and technology stakeholders to translate business problems into data designs. You can create optimal designs through iterative processes, aligning user needs with organisational objectives and system requirements.


Data architect

A data architect designs and builds data models to fulfil the strategic data needs of the business as defined by chief data architects. At this level, you will:


  undertake design, support and provide guidance for the upgrade, management, de-commission and archive of data in compliance with data policy
  provide input into data dictionaries


Skills needed for this role


  
Communication skills (data). You can effectively translate and accurately communicate across technical and non-technical stakeholders as well as facilitate discussions within a multidisciplinary team, with potentially difficult dynamics. You can advocate for the team externally and can manage differing perspectives. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data analysis and synthesis. You undertake data profiling and source system analysis. You can present clear insights to colleagues to support the end use of the data. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data communication. You know that data needs to be aligned to the needs of the end user. You can create basic visuals and presentations. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Data governance. You understand what data governance is required. You can take responsibility for the assurance of data solutions and make recommendations to ensure compliance. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data innovation. You are aware of opportunities for innovation with new tools and uses of data. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Data modelling. You can explain the concepts and principles of data modelling and can produce, maintain and update relevant data models for specific business needs. You can reverse-engineer data models from a live system. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data standards. You know how to develop data standards for a specific component. You can analyse where data standards have been applied or breached and undertake an impact analysis of that breach. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Metadata management. You work with metadata repositories to complete complex tasks such as data and systems integration impact analysis. You maintain a repository to ensure information remains accurate and up to date. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Problem resolution (data). You respond to problems in databases, data processes, data products and services as they occur. You initiate actions, monitor services and identify trends to resolve problems. You determine the appropriate remedy and assist with implementation of it as well as preventative measures. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Strategic thinking (data architecture). You know about the strategic context of your work and why it is important. You can support strategic planning in an administrative capacity. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Turning business problems into data design. You design data architecture by dealing with specific business problems and aligning it to enterprise-wide standards and principles. You work within the context of well understood architecture and can identify appropriate patterns. (Relevant skill level: working)


Senior data architect

A senior data architect delivers the vision for the organisation as set by the chief data architect. At this level, you will:


  design data models and metadata systems and help chief data architects to interpret business needs
  provide oversight and advice to other data architects who are undertaking the design of data models and support the management of data dictionaries
  make sure that your teams are working to the standards set for the organisation by the chief data architect
  work with technical architects to make sure that an organisation’s systems are designed in accordance with the appropriate data architecture


Skills needed for this role


  
Communication skills (data). You can listen to the needs of technical and business stakeholders and interpret them. You can manage stakeholder expectations and be flexible. You know how to manage proactive and reactive communication. You can facilitate difficult discussions within the team or with diverse senior stakeholders. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Data analysis and synthesis. You can undertake data profiling and source system analysis. You can present clear insights to colleagues to support the end use of the data. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data communication. You understand the appropriate mediums to communicate findings; you can shape communications for the audience. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data governance. You can evolve and define data governance, and take responsibility for collaborating and supporting in wider governance. You know how to assure and integrate data services to meet the needs of multiple business services. You work proactively to ensure the organisation designs architecture that considers data. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Data innovation. You understand the impact of emerging trends on the organisation in data tools, analysis techniques and data usage. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data modelling. You understand the concepts and principles of data modelling and can produce relevant data models across multiple subject areas. You know how to reverse-engineer data models from a live system. You understand industry recognised data modelling patterns and standards and know when to apply them. You can compare and align different data models. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Data standards. You can develop and set data standards across multiple subject areas. You can act as the escalation point for breaches of data standards and make recommendations about how the organisation should resolve that breach. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Metadata management. You can design an appropriate metadata repository and present changes to existing metadata repositories. You understand a range of tools for storing and working with metadata. You can provide oversight and advice to more inexperienced members of the team. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Problem resolution (data). You can ensure that the most appropriate actions are taken to resolve problems as they occur. You coordinate teams to resolve problems and implement solutions and preventative measures. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Strategic thinking (data architecture). You work within a strategic context and communicate how activities meet strategic goals. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Turning business problems into data design. You can design data architecture by dealing with problems that span different business areas. You can draw links between problems in order to reach common solutions. You can work across multiple subject areas, a single large or complicated subject area. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)


Chief data architect

A chief data architect sets the vision for the organisation’s use of data as directed by the appropriate governance body. At this level, you will:


  oversee the design of multiple data models and have a broad understanding of how each model fulfils the needs of the business
  be accountable for the definition of the organisation’s data strategy
  champion data architecture across government, and set the standards and ways of working for the data architecture community
  provide advice to project teams and oversee the management of the full data product life cycle
  have responsibility for making sure that organisations systems are designed in accordance with the data architecture


Skills needed for this role


  
Communication skills (data). You can mediate between people and mend relationships, communicating with stakeholders at all levels. You can manage stakeholders’ expectations and facilitate discussions across high risk or complexity or under constrained timescales. You know how to speak on behalf of the community to large audiences inside and outside government. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Data analysis and synthesis. You can undertake data profiling and source system analysis. You can present clear insights to colleagues to support the end use of the data. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Data communication. You can turn complex data into clear, simple and actionable stories. You will share data communication skills with the team and across government. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Data governance. You can ensure data governance supports changes to the organisational strategy. You can align data governance with wider governance (for example, budget). You can assure corporate services by understanding important risks and mitigation through assurance mechanisms. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Data innovation. You can identify areas of innovation in data tools and techniques, and recognise appropriate timing for adoption. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Data modelling. You understand the concepts and principles of data modelling, and can produce relevant data models. You can work across government and into industry, understanding opportunities for re-use and alignment between the data models in different organisations. You design how data models should be categorised within the organisation. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Data standards. You develop and set data standards for an organisation. You cam communicate the business benefit of data standards, championing and governing those standards across the organisation. You understand where standards need to be set across an organisation and how to set the standards within an organisation in the wider context of government. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Metadata management. You understand how metadata repositories can support different areas of the business. You promote and communicate the value of metadata repositories. You set up robust governance processes for keeping the repositories up to date. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Problem resolution (data). You can anticipate problems and know how to prevent them. You understand how the problem fits into the larger picture. You can articulate the problem and help others to articulate the problem. You build problem-solving capabilities in others. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Strategic thinking (data architecture). You can leads the design and implementation of strategy, directing the evaluation of strategies and policies to ensure business requirements are being met. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Turning business problems into data design. You can design data architecture by dealing with problems that span the enterprise. You can work across all organisational subject areas. (Relevant skill level: expert)


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs






      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Quality Assurance Testing (QAT) analyst
        Technical architect
        Software developer
        Test engineer
        Programme delivery manager

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    