
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    ETL product types: warm air and radiant heating equipment
  

  
  

  
    
  Energy efficient warm air and radiant heating equipment on the Energy Technology List. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      1 February 2014
      Last updated
      
        20 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    ETL767 Warm air and radiant heating equipment
    
        
          Ref: ETL767
        
        PDF, 783KB, 14 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guide explains the energy and cost savings available from warm air and radiant heating equipment on the ETL This includes the following product types:


  indirect-fired warm air heating equipment
  radiant tube heaters
  radiant plaque and cone heaters
  optimising controllers


See the Energy Technology Product List for the eligible products in this category, listed by brand name.

See the Energy Technology Criteria List.



        
      

      
    Published 1 February 2014
    Last updated 20 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 April 2020
              On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the ECA and First Year Tax Credits Scheme (FYTC) will end from April 2020 for products on the ETL. This ETL publication has been updated to remove references to the ECA.
            
            
              4 January 2019
              Updated with energy and cost saving examples of products that fall into this ETL technology category.
            
            
              1 February 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        ETL product types: heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment
        ETL product types: high speed hand air dryers
        ETL product types: air-to-air energy recovery
        ETL product types: solar thermal systems and collectors
        ETL product types: uninterruptible power supply (UPS)

  




      

    Collection

  


        Energy Technology List (ETL): product types

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy
        Energy demand reduction

  


  

  


    
  


    