
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Conflict, Stability and Security Fund: cyber and technology programme call for bids 2021 to 2022
  

  
  

  
    
  The Conflict, Stability and Security Fund (CSSF) is inviting project proposals for the cyber and technology programme. The bidding deadline is 26 July 2021.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office and Conflict, Stability and Security Fund

      
      Published
      6 July 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    CSSF cyber and technology programme lot 1: national and regional online safety campaigns 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    CSSF cyber and technology programme lot 2: threat intelligence provision and support to defend against and deter cybercrime 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    CSSF cyber and technology programme lot 3: research and analysis 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Project proposal form template
    
        ODT, 50.2KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Activity-based budget template
    
        ODS, 10.3KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    FCDO grant agreement
    
        ODT, 126KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    FCDO memorandum of understanding
    
        ODT, 60.5KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
As outlined in the Integrated Review, the UK’s vision is to be a leading, responsible cyber power, working with partners to shape cyberspace according to our values.

The UK government aims to create a cyberspace that is free, open, peaceful and secure, and which benefits all countries and all people. In May 2021, the Foreign Secretary announced £22 million of new investment to build cyber-security resilience in developing countries and globally, particularly in Africa and the Indo-Pacific.

The government’s Conflict, Stability and Security Fund (CSSF) is inviting international project proposals for the cyber and technology programme. Projects should aim to improve online safety overseas, tackle cybercrime by improving the application of threat intelligence, and increase our understanding of current and emerging cyber, digital, data and technology issues through research and assessments.

Cyber and technology programme: project themes

We welcome project proposals across three separate ‘lots’:


  
lot 1: national and regional online safety campaigns (target budget: £1.5 million)
  
lot 2: threat intelligence provision and support to defend against and deter cybercrime (target budget: £1.5 million)
  
lot 3: research and analysis, to deliver Integrated Review objectives (target budget: £1 million)


Proposals should describe how the project will meet objectives, impact and value for money. Projects should complement existing capacity-building activity being delivered by international donors. The Cybil Portal is a useful tool to monitor donors’ activity.

Proposals should consider the potential impact of COVID-19, including full or partial lockdowns, local or international travel restrictions, and political scenarios that might affect the project’s implementation eg. elections.

Project proposal budgets

Proposals can cover financial years 2021 to 2022 and 2022 to 2023. Target budgets for each lot are included above. Funds for 2021 to 2022 have been approved. Funds for 2022 to 2023 is conditional on the government’s next spending allocation round.

Project proposals should describe what will be achieved by March 2022, and where applicable, what would be implemented and achieved if funds for financial year 2022 to 2023 are available.

For projects across multiple years, there is a break clause at the end of the financial year in March 2022. We retain sole discretion on the decision whether to continue the project beyond March 2022. This depends on funding availability for the next financial year and implementer performance.

Project proposals for financial year 2021 to 2022 should provide a ‘range’ of funding options and outline activity and impact within each range. For example, for lot 1, you should outline 
what the project will achieve with funds of £500,000; £1 million; and £1.5 million.

Who can bid

The CSSF welcomes bids from academia, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), inter-governmental organisations and not-for-profit arms of commercial entities.

Many capacity building projects cannot be delivered fully by a single implementer, as they require a diverse range of capability and skills. We welcome bids from consortiums led by non-for-profit organisations. Commercial organisations can join consortiums as part of a bidding team. The commercial element of the proposal, which can be sub-contracted by the not-for-profit organisation, should be proportionate.

How to submit a proposal


You should submit proposals to cybercapacity.building@fcdo.gov.uk by 11:59pm (British Summer Time) on 26 July 2021.

Proposals must include:


  completed Project Proposal Form (PPF)

  completed Activity-based Budget (ABB)

  staff daily rate card
  confirmation you are content to use the FCDO grant agreement or FCDO memorandum of understanding template



We will not consider proposals submitted after the deadline. All proposals must be in English and budgets must be in pound sterling (GBP).

Criteria for assessing proposals

Proposals will be assessed against:


  value for money for economy, efficiency, effectiveness, equity, and cost-effectiveness
  alignment with the requirements
  project viability, including capacity and capability of implementing organisation(s)
  project design, including clear, achievable objectives/outputs/outcomes/impact
  good risk, issue and stakeholder management
  implementer experience and past performance
  sustainability of impact





        
      

      
    Published 6 July 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Foreign affairs
        Cyber security

  


  

  


    
  


    