
  
    
      Part 5 - practice note 4:  2010: renewable energy installations

    

      
        
  This practice note gives guidance to help you deal with hereditaments, or part of hereditaments, that include equipment used, or intended to be used, for the generation of power from renewable sources of energy. It covers solar panels, wind turbines, biomass, water power & other renewable energy technologies.

      
        
          

    

























































































































































































































































































            

      
        
          
            1. Introduction
          
        
        

    The inclusion or otherwise of installations with the capacity to generate heat or electrical energy in local taxation ‘lists’ is governed by legislation. Installations may comprise hereditaments in their own right with land, or form part of larger domestic or non domestic hereditaments. There will also be occasions when installations installed on otherwise exempt or part exempt hereditaments must be considered for inclusion in a list.
Due to the pioneering technology involved and the associated lack of economies of scale in production of components, the installation costs of alternative energy producing equipment have been historically very high compared to the return on investment flowing from the value of the energy produced.
Driven by targets to achieve set proportions of national energy production from alternative sources and mindful of the uneconomic nature of the new technologies, the Government has put in place a variety of incentives to seek to encourage proliferation. These incentives have consisted of grants, guaranteed tariffs and various tax reliefs, together with enabling legislation such as relaxed planning requirements and the requirement for distribution grid operators to accept contributions to the grid from small electrical energy producers.
The legislative framework as it relates to Rating and Council Tax is not straightforward and in turn, the provision of reliefs and incentives via this framework is complex.
This practice note seeks to bring together current practice based on the law as it currently stands.



      
        
          
            2. Known technologies (not intended to be a comprehensive list)
          
        
        

    2.1 Combined Heat and Power (CHP)
Formed around the concept that it is more efficient (if you are consuming energy), to generate it on or near the site on which it is to be consumed, then, since otherwise waste heat is produced as a by product, the heat can be utilised for space heating or process applications, rather than be dumped to atmosphere (as tends to happen at power stations). There will also be efficiency gains due to reduction of distribution losses. To qualify as a CHP installation for rating purposes, the installation has to generate, at least in part, electrical power.
These systems normally use fossil fuels (generally natural gas) but are included here since they are seen as contributors to the required net reduction in carbon emissions and may use fuel sources such as bio mass. Specific guidance as to the correct approach to dealing with CHP exceptions is to be found elsewhere within Rating Manual Volume 3, but brief mention of the subject is made at 5.3 below.
2.2 Solar Heating Panels (Water)
In their simplest form these consist of little more than a length of piping close laid into a panel and exposed to the sun, the water (or glycol mix) can flow through the pipe by convection or assisted by a pump. The water in the pipe, having gained energy as heat from the sun can be used in space heating or more usually, in the supply of hot water via an indirect system.
2.3 Photo Voltaic Panels
These utilise compounds that respond to exposure to light with the production of electric charge/current. The panels are typically mounted in arrays and connected up so as to provide a useable voltage and current for either temporary storage in batteries or connected to the mains electricity distribution grid.
2.4 Bio Mass Boilers
Often using wood chip fuel for the furnace that supplies heat to the boiler. Simplistically, bio mass (wood, paper, vegetable matter) replaces fossil fuels and so substitutes a dwindling fuel source for a renewable one. The hot water or steam produced can be used for electricity generation, space heating or process applications.
2.5 Water Power
Encountered as a gravity fed water driven wheel/turbine that drives an alternator (to produce electricity) and/or (rarely these days) linked directly to a drive mechanism to power machinery.
There are large hydro electric plants that have contributed to the electricity distribution grid for decades and of more recent date, small water powered projects have emerged.
2.6 Tidal or Wave Power
These installations use tidal or wave motion to produce electricity via cam or turbine driven alternators.
As with historic tide mills, it is also possible to drive process machinery rather than generate electricity, though rarely encountered.
2.7 Wind Power
An established technology utilising the power of the wind to turn a turbine linked to an alternator. Turbine sets range from massive off shore or on land installations to ‘set top’ installations powering illuminated road signs. Electrical energy may be placed straight into the national distribution grid or used on site, often with battery storage as a buffer.
There are, of course, a small number of working wind mills still in existence, demonstrating that electrical production is not the only use for wind power.



      
        
          
            3.  The Hereditament
          
        
        

    Being something that is, or may become, liable to a rate, the hereditament is the starting point for consideration of the impact of local taxation on alternative energy installations.
An installation that consists of a number of wind turbines situated on land occupied exclusively for the purposes of electrical power generation is likely to comprise an individual hereditament for rating purposes. It is not intended here to explore in detail the many possibilities that may arise as to identification of the hereditament, save to say that it is not always abundantly clear. However, examination of the physical layout, association with other property and consideration as to who is in paramount control will usually provide an answer. See Westminster City Council v Southern Railway Co. [1936] A.C. 511
Renewable energy equipment installed as part of the wider plant and machinery installation on a hereditament can usually be identified, if required, for the purposes of considering any particular exceptions or reliefs that may be applicable, for example individual wind turbines, or CHP plant. Although the question will still need to be asked: Does this installation comprise a separate hereditament?
Identification of the hereditament is equally important when considering domestic, composite or exempt hereditaments



      
        
          
            4. Liability to be Rated
          
        
        

    Firstly, it is of note that since 1st April 1990, there has been no regime to include domestic property in a Rating List, instead, a Community Charge replaced the rating of domestic property up until 1st April 1993, this tax regime was then replaced by the Council Tax.
The liability for Council Tax is measured with reference to the existence of units of taxable property (hereditaments), placed into bands of value based on the estimated freehold market value (or long leasehold value) as at 1st April 1991.
Alternative energy installations have proliferated on domestic dwellings, firstly as water based solar panels for hot water systems, then subsequently in the form of photovoltaic panels for the production of electricity. Wind turbines are sometimes encountered in the domestic setting, but rarely so.
It is thought that alternative energy installations present on domestic properties are normally likely to comprise part of that domestic hereditament and are to be treated as fixtures thereon.
Turning then to non-domestic hereditaments:
For a renewable energy installation to be liable to be rated, it must be, or be part of, a non domestic or composite hereditament and be shown in the appropriate Rating List.
How then, is a renewable energy installation considered to be, or be part of, a hereditament?
The majority of alternative energy installations are likely to contain plant and machinery, but not exclusively so, since some installations (or part of them) are likely to be part of the setting of a wider hereditament. See J Lyons and Co Ltd v The Attorney General [1944] 1 All ER 477 and Schofield (IT) v R & H Hall Ltd [1975] STC 353 (Court of Appeal (Northern Ireland)).
But on the general assumption that the majority of installations comprise plant and machinery together with the land upon which that plant and machinery is situated, then the first point of reference is SI 2000 No. 540 The Valuation for Rating (Plant and Machinery) Regulations. Equivalent SI’s are in force in Wales and in Scotland.
The effect of the regulations is to deem, (for the purposes of calculating the extent of liability via a valuation used to determine a rateable value) that any plant and machinery included in the regulations and present in or on the hereditament will be part of that hereditament.
The regulations are divided into four Classes, the bulk of the items of plant and machinery likely to be encountered in an alternative energy installation will be found in Class 1. It must however be remembered that items such as supports, foundations, flumes. can be associated with these installations and it may be appropriate to look to Class 4 (or any other Class) of the regulations to discover if rateability of those elements is at point.
The plant and machinery regulations have been subsequently subject to secondary regulations, these regulations were designed to accommodate the intention to give relief from liability to taxation for certain renewable energy installations or part of them.



      
        
          
            5. Exemptions, Exceptions and Reliefs
          
        
        

    5.1 Agricultural Land and Buildings
Exemption from non domestic rates arises from the fact that agricultural land and buildings are conferred exemption under Schedule 5 of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 (LGFA 1988) as amended.
Agricultural land clearly offers potential for the installation of almost all of the available alternative energy installations, but the most significant are arrays of photo voltaic panels, wind turbines and bio-mass burning.
Where the installation is occupied by the occupier of the agricultural land or buildings and it serves only the agricultural land or building upon which it is situated and the energy produced is wholly used for agricultural purposes in connection with agricultural activities carried out on that land or in those buildings, no difficulties arise, there is no liability to be rated as the renewable energy installation will form part of the existing exempt (or part exempt but composite) hereditament.
However, should any of the energy produced be used for domestic purposes, commercial purposes, or there are questions over the hereditament, then difficulties arise and case studies to illustrate this are given below.
5.2 Domestic Properties
Turning next to domestic properties, in the vast majority of cases, the renewable energy installation will generally supplement or replace an existing service to that dwelling, for example a passive hot water system fed by solar panels. Questions have, however, arisen in respect of photo voltaic panels. It is usual when installing such panels to link the electrical output directly to the national grid, via a small interface, each domestic property with such a facility effectively becomes a mini power station.
Pragmatically the view has been taken, in the majority of cases, to treat the installation along with the dwelling in or upon which it is situated as a single hereditament, even if the installation is installed by and is under the control of a third party under what is known as the ‘rent a roof’ scheme. This policy follows central government stated aims.
It can be argued however, that once a ‘relevant transaction’ occurs, then the value of the installation can be taken into account in the Council Tax band for that domestic property. Evidence for any uplift in value will in practice however, be hard to isolate. (see 6.0 below) It is possible that a roof covered in photovoltaic panels may actually suppress the market value of the dwelling, particularly when viewed in the market place of April 1991 This argument will equally apply to the consideration of banding for ‘new build’ schemes incorporating renewable energy installations, although placing a lower band on the dwelling due to the visual impact of such an installation seems to be an unlikely outcome.
The possibility of installations on domestic properties crossing the line to become a separately rateable (composite) hereditament is discussed in the case studies below.
5.3 Non-domestic Properties (Including Composites)
Exceptions and reliefs for renewable energy installations are provided within the scope of two principle statutory instruments, each one amends the wording of SI No. 540 discussed above. The unchanged exception provided by SI 540 Class 1 (d) will also be covered, although it is likely that this exception was only ever intended to apply to major power generating stations.
5.4 CHP Exceptions
SI 2001 No. 846 The Valuation for Rating (Plant and Machinery) (England) (Amendment) Regulations concerns the treatment for rating purposes of plant and machinery installed on a hereditament and comprising a combined heat and power (CHP) station. The regulation was brought in because there was a perceived unfairness produced as a result of the exception from valuation of Class 1 items associated with the generation of power for distribution for sale to consumers. Before SI 846 was enacted, an installation producing power for consumption on site, enjoyed no relief from rating.
The practical application of SI 846 is covered in detail Rating Manual - Volume 4 - Section 3 - Practice Note 3 - Combined Heat and Power
This practice note is not intended to duplicate the extensive material contained in the above Rating Manual section, however a summary of the main points follows.
Exception of the value of the equipment can only be considered if there is a valid full or partial exemption certificate in force and issued by the appropriate authority. Currently known as a CHPQA 002 certificate.
Certification will depend on efficiencies and the fuel used, per the provisions of paragraph 148 of Schedule 6 of the Finance Act 2000
Exception will only extend to those items included within Class 1 Table 1 (b), (c), (d) or (k) of SI 540. That is, only the ‘power’ items, items that are rateable within any other Class will not be conferred exception here.
The broad effect of SI 846 is that CHP installations, carrying appropriate certification gain an exception (to an extent) from liability for rating purposes. There have been no real practical difficulties in administering the scheme due to its limited scope and tight regime.
5.5 SI 2000 No.540 Class 1 (d) Exception
Brought in as a result of the review conducted by the second Wood Committee Report in 1999, this limited exception was introduced with the aim of putting power generating hereditaments, (as regards the valuation of plant and machinery), on an equal footing to other industrial hereditaments. The exception at Class 1 (d) removes from consideration (in determining the value of the hereditament) any value attributable to the power generating equipment where that power is mainly or exclusively for distribution for sale to consumers.
This exception was designed to apply to the large power generating concerns, it is of interest as regards renewable energy installations since, (although perhaps not intentionally) it can be literally applied to generating equipment of any size.
The question must be posed: Does connection to the National Grid satisfy the provisions of Class 1 (d) ?
Given that the majority of photo voltaic installations are connected directly to the National Grid it can be argued that the electricity produced is thus mainly or exclusively for distribution for sale to consumers. This interpretation seems reasonable against the background of a statutory framework designed in favour of reliefs for renewable energy producers, but it was almost certainly not designed with that aim in mind.
5.6 SI 2008 No. 2332 The Microgeneration Regulations
Aimed as an incentive to encourage proliferation of small renewable energy installations, SI 2008 No. 2332 The Valuation for Rating (Plant and Machinery) (England) (Amendment) Regulations came into force on 1st October 2008. Similar regulations are in force in Scotland and Wales.
These regulations give a time limited exception from liability for qualifying equipment installed on or after 1st October 2008.
The practice note covering the practical application of the regulations can be found here:  Rating Manual - Section 6 Part 5 Practice Note 2 Microgeneration
The key difference between the operation of the earlier SI 846 and SI 2332 is that SI 2332 gives exception from valuation to all plant and machinery with microgeneration capacity as defined. That is, it amends SI 540 paragraph (2) by the insertion of a new paragraph (2A) and thus the exception applies to items found in any of the four Classes within the regulations.
The qualification for exception, (apart from the time limit being from the time of installation as from 1st October 2008 up until the date on which the next list is compiled) is governed by section 26(2) (interpretation) of the Climate Change and Sustainable Energy Act 2006 (a). The qualification is based upon the source of energy or type of technology under consideration and its output, the stated limits to output being 50kW (electrical) or 45kWe (thermal).
The practical approach to dealing with the small installations that SI 2332 is intended to cover is detailed here and in the links contained within:



      
        
          
            6.0 Valuation
          
        
        

    6.1 Domestic or Composite Hereditaments
It is necessary to conduct a valuation of renewable energy installations in order to calculate the measure of liability, that is, the Rateable Value of the subject hereditament in the Rating List, or alternatively the banding of the dwelling.
Valuation in respect of renewable energy installations in or on domestic properties is touched upon at 4.0 above, it will only require closer consideration if investigation of the hereditament reveals that the installation has strayed beyond that which can be considered as part of the dwelling as a dwelling and so becomes a question of considering the value of a composite hereditament, or possibly an entirely separate hereditament from the dwelling.
The possibility that, as the market place develops, price differentials will be apparent between those dwellings with renewable energy installations and those without, is not being ignored, it is simply that it seems highly improbable that there will be a provable impact on Council Tax bands given the historic 1st April 1991 valuation date.
6.2 Non Domestic Hereditaments
On the assumption that renewable energy installations on or comprising non domestic hereditaments will consist in part of plant and machinery, then the items to include for the purposes of the valuation will be governed by the regulations discussed above.
There are three traditionally accepted approaches to calculating value.
1. The comparison approach based on rental transactions in the market.
2. The ‘profits’ or ‘receipts and expenditure’ method.
3. The ‘contractors’ method.
It is also normal practice to adopt a combination of methods where this has a sound rationale. For example the approach taken to valuation of telecommunication equipment is a mixture of the comparison approach at regards the ‘site’ and the contractors approach as regards the installed plant, machinery and buildings.
The approaches taken in the following case studies will hopefully explain the existing thinking and will highlight some of the issues arising.



      
        
          
            7. The tariff structure
          
        
        

    It is necessary to refer to the incentive schemes (favourable tariffs for electricity generation derived from renewables) put in place by the government, since these tariffs may affect the value of the renewable energy installation under consideration.
Appendix A gives the background to, and tariff structure for the various renewable energy technologies and fuel sources. This tariff structure was introduced on 1st April 2010 and has been subject to later amendment. The first amendment was effective from 1st August 2012 and the new tariffs are shown at the end of Appendix A, it is likely that these will continue to change.
For the purposes of the 2010 Rating List, the Antecedent Valuation Date (AVD) is 1st April 2008.
As at 1st April 2008, the tariffs were not available and if they are considered to be, (as they most likely are) an economic factor, then they cannot be taken into account for the purposes of determining rateable values in the 2010 Rating List. The consequence of this is that the rateable values determined for the purposes of the 2010 Rating List will generally be lower than they would have been if the favourable tariff regime could have been taken into account as at the AVD.



      
        
          
            8. Case studies
          
        
        

    Here are a number of examples of renewable energy installations and details of the recommended approach to be taken.
8.1 Small scale PV at a dwelling - A
1. Installation of photovoltaic panels on the roof of an existing dwelling house, the electricity generating capacity being 3.9 kW. The panels are connected to the National Grid, the domestic occupier receives income for his contribution to the ‘grid’ in line with the tariffs in place as at 10th September 2010, the day on which the installation was completed. The occupier paid for and operates the installation himself.
2. The renewable energy installation, together with the dwelling house upon which it is situated comprises one single hereditament for Council Tax purposes.
3. The dwelling is and remains in the same Council Tax band as it was before the installation was completed.
4. Should the dwelling be subject to a relevant transaction during the life of the current Council Tax List, it is not recommended that any review to the banding be made on the grounds of the existence of the renewable energy installation alone. An undertaking has been made by government that Council Tax bills will not increase as a result of renewable energy installations in homes.
5. The definition of ‘small scale’ is not certain and so in instances of doubt, where an installation looks to be out of proportion to the dwelling or it’s grounds, then advice must be sought from the Utilities, Telecoms and Transport Team (UTT).
8.2 Small scale PV at a dwelling - B
As scenario A. but the installation is paid for, maintained and operated by an energy company. (Often referred to as a ‘rent a roof’ installation) The occupier of the dwelling receives payment from the energy company based on the standard retail value of the electricity produced by the installation, (or some other financial arrangement) but the energy company claims the tariff payments for itself.

  
    the renewable energy installation, together with the dwelling house upon which it is situated comprises one single hereditament for Council Tax purposes
  
  
    the dwelling is and remains in the same Council Tax band as it was before the installation was completed
  

Should the dwelling be subject to a relevant transaction during the life of the current Council Tax List, it is not recommended that any review to the banding be made on the grounds of the existence of the renewable energy installation alone.
8.3 Small scale thermal solar panels at a dwelling
Installation of solar heating panels on the roof of a dwelling house, they provide energy to supplement the domestic hot water system at the dwelling.

  
    the renewable energy installation, together with the dwelling house upon which it is situated comprises one single hereditament for Council Tax purposes
  
  
    the dwelling is and remains in the same Council Tax band as it was before the installation was completed
  

Should the dwelling be subject to a relevant transaction during the life of the current Council Tax List, it is not recommended that any review to the banding be made on the grounds of the existence of the renewable energy installation alone.
8.4 Small scale PV on a farm
An existing barn roof has 450 sq m of photo voltaic panels installed on it. The installation has a capacity of 45 kW and was completed in June 2012. The electricity produced feeds to the national grid. The installation is installed by and operated by the farmer.
It is most likely that the installation will form part of the wider farm hereditament, (remembering that the wider farm is still a hereditament even if it is exempt.) An alternative possibility is that the installation forms a hereditament in it’s own right, since it is used for an entirely different purpose to the wider farm.
Neither the electricity produced nor the equipment used to produce it is wholly used in connection with agricultural operations on agricultural land. It is not therefore considered that exemption will apply within the scope of Schedule 5 LGFA 1988.

  
    SI 2008 No. 2332 will apply to give exception to the value of all the installed plant and machinery up until the day on which the next rating list is compiled. (The generating capacity does not exceed 50 kW)
  
  
    even while the exception provisions of SI 2332 apply there will be a value attributable to the ‘site rent’ for the roof of the barn, but it is not recommended that an assessment should be raised on this account alone
  
  
    if the installation was put in place and operational before 1st April 2010 then it would need to be assessed from that date
  
  
    advice as to the appropriate level of value to apply can be deduced from the link at 5.3 above, but in cases of doubt the matter may be referred to the UTT
  
  
    when the installation does fall to be assessed, it is likely that it will qualify for partial exception via SI 2000 No. 540 Class 1 (d). That is, the value of the Class 1 “power” items are excepted, since the grid connection means that electricity produced is mainly or exclusively for distribution for sale to consumers
  

The valuation approach applied in this case is likely to use a shortened receipts and expenditure method, although an approach based on a contractors basis with an addition for site rent is equally valid, (but likely to produce a very high and disproportionate answer.)
The recommended value to apply (should the installation date have been before 1st April 2010 but after 1st October 2008) is £8 per kW or £360 say £350 Rateable Value, for the purposes of the 2010 rating list.
Values may increase markedly for the purposes of later Rating Lists, since the tariff regime in place post 1st April 2010 will influence values.
8.5 Medium scale renewable fuelled boiler on a Farm:

  
    the boiler is fired by wood pellets derived partly from on-farm resources and partly bought in
  
  
    the boiler provides heating for the extensive pig facility but also provides heating for the farmhouse and farm offices
  
  
    the output of the boiler is 125 kW, it was installed and is operated by the farmer
  
  
    the renewable energy installation is most likely to form part of the wider composite (part exempt) farm hereditament
  
  
    the main use of the installation is in connection with the pig facility, but there is some use made of the equipment to heat the farmhouse (domestic) and the farm offices
  
  
    the qualification for agricultural exemption requires a ‘wholly used’ test to be met, but minor alternative uses may be acceptable so as not to defeat exemption
  
  
    the heating power produced is used on the farm and in the dwelling. As a source of space heating it would be likely to be rateable within Class 2 Table 2, but if this route is taken, questions may arise as to the equipment satisfying the ‘manufacturing operations or trade processes’ exception, please seek advice from the National Specialist Unit, Crown and Industrial, in cases of doubt
  
  
    the output of the installation exceeds 45 kWe (thermal) and so the SI 2008 No. 2332 qualification is not met
  

While it is possible that the exemption requirements of LGFA Schedule 5 may be met here, it is far from certain given the use of some of the heat output for domestic purposes. Where renewable energy installations on farms are encountered with outputs exceeding the 50 kW (electrical) or 45 kW(e) (thermal) limits, then all cases should be referred to the UTT for advice.
8.6 Large scale solar PV at a farm
A fenced and gated 1 Ha field is used to house frame mounted photo voltaic panels. There are small buildings on site to house electrical equipment and the whole array is connected to the National Grid to which all the 1.2 MW of electricity produced is exported. The Installation was installed and is operated by an energy company, they pay the farmer an annual rent for the use of his land.

  
    this installation forms a separate hereditament from the farm
  
  
    the Class 1 (d) exception within SI 2000 No. 540 will apply since the electricity produced is mainly or exclusively for distribution for sale to consumers
  
  
    SI 2008 No. 2332 will not apply
  
  
    agricultural exemption will not apply
  
  
    advice should be sought from the UTT, they will almost certainly take on the task of valuing this hereditament and processing the list entry
  

The most likely valuation approach taken here will be based on a shortened receipts and expenditure method and so the exception conveyed by Class 1 (d) to SI 2000 No. 540 will be dealt with in calculating the tenants share under that approach.
The same approach would be taken in the case of a large scale wind turbine based installation, although the approach to and valuation produced may be different, due to the differing profitability inherent in the two electricity generation methods.
8.7 Small scale wind turbine at a farm
A single wind turbine installed by the farmer adjacent to the farmhouse, the turbine produces 11 kW of electrical power. 25% of the electricity is used in the farmhouse and 75% to heat and light barns. the turbine is not connected to the National Grid and energy is stored in a bank of batteries. The installation was completed on 25th September 2009.

  
    the installation forms part of the wider composite (part exempt) hereditament.
  
  
    the installation is not wholly used for agricultural purposes on agricultural land and so will not be exempt within Schedule 5 to LGFA 1988
  
  
    there is no connection to the National Grid and so exception within Class 1 (d) of SI 2000 No. 540 will not apply
  
  
    the value of the plant and machinery contained in the installation would have been excepted by SI 2008 No. 2332 up until 1st April 2010, but not beyond
  
  
    the recommended value to apply for the purposes of the 2010 Rating List will be £14 per kW or £154 RV say £150
  

Values may increase significantly in respect of later rating lists due to the impact of the tariff regime.
8.8 Medium scale PV installation on commercial roof top
A major retailer installed and controls 5000+ photo voltaic panels on the roof of one of its retail stores, the installation was completed on 21st June 2011, it produces 200 kW of electrical power. The installation is connected to the National Grid, but is intended to provide 25% of the stores electrical power requirements.
1. It’s most likely that the installation will form part of the wider retail store hereditament but it could be argued that it forms a separate hereditament given its different use from that of the store itself.
2. The installation is connected to the National Grid and although when producing power it is likely that an amount of power exceeding the amount generated will be consumed on the premises, it is still arguable that the grid connection is, in itself, sufficient to satisfy the ‘mainly or exclusively for distribution for sale to consumers’ qualification in Class 1 (d) to SI 2000 No. 540.
3. The output qualification in SI 2008 No. 2332 is not satisfied since the installation exceeds 50 kW
4. Valuation advice should be sought from the UTT
The most likely valuation approach taken here will be based on a shortened receipts and expenditure method and so the exception conveyed by Class 1 (d) to SI 2000 No. 540 will be dealt with in calculating the tenants share under that approach.
An alternative approach would be to treat the equipment comprised within the installation as plant and machinery and to include the value of the rateable plant and machinery with the main store hereditament. This approach will however tend to produce a disproportionately high value for the installation given the high installation costs weighed against the return on investment. Particularly when judged in the ‘no tariff’ economic market of 1st April 2008.
If the facts differ such that the installation were installed by and controlled by an energy company, such that the installation was under the paramount control of a third party, then it seems most likely that the installation would form a separate hereditament from the retail store. The unit of assessment will therefore be affected, but the value attributed to the installation would most likely be the same.
If a rent is paid for the site by a third party, then that could be representative of value for rating purposes and examples of this are known, the value for rating purposes could then become that site rent (suitably adjusted) with the value of plant and machinery on a contractors approach added.




        
  
