
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Sustainable procurement: the GBS for food and catering services
  

  
  

  
    
  Official Government Buying Standards (GBS) for food and catering services

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      1 July 2014
      Last updated
      
        18 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Government Buying Standard for food and catering services
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Nutrition standards: technical guidance
    
        PDF, 677KB, 61 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex to GBS for food and catering services
    
        PDF, 29.4KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email defra.helpline@defra.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
All government departments and their related organisations must make sure that they meet the minimum mandatory Government Buying Standards (GBS) when buying goods and services. We also encourage the wider public sector to specify the minimum mandatory standards in tenders.

We encourage everyone to meet the best practice standards, which go further than the mandatory standards.

The product specifications set out in the GBS are aimed primarily at public sector organisations procuring goods or services. However, any organisation concerned about sustainable procurement may choose to follow them or to specify them in tenders.




        
      

      
    Published 1 July 2014
    Last updated 18 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              18 August 2021
              Added the technical guidance for nutrition standards.
            
            
              15 July 2021
              We've updated the Government Buying Standard for food and catering.
            
            
              27 March 2015
              Buying Standards document has been updated to clarify the best practice criterion for sugar sweetened beverages – the criteria have not changed.
            
            
              1 July 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Procurement Policy Note 10/14: the plan for public procurement of food and catering
        Sustainable procurement: the Government Buying Standards (GBS)
        Sustainable procurement: the GBS for office ICT equipment
        Sustainable procurement: the GBS for water-using products
        Sustainable procurement: the GBS for horticulture and park services

  




      

    Collection

  


        Sustainable procurement: the Government Buying Standards (GBS)
        Buying for schools: templates and forms

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Sustainable development
        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability

  


  

  


    
  


    