
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Government Social Research Service Fast Stream Scheme
  

  
  

  
    
  The scheme is an accelerated development programme that seeks that develop our future professional leaders in the Government Social Research Service.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Social Research Profession

      
      Published
      23 September 2016
      Last updated
      
        3 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    GSR Fast Stream Job Descriptions 
    
        PDF, 447 KB, 22 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    GSR Example of Knowledge test questions 
    
        PDF, 177 KB, 6 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Government Social Research Service 2022 Fast Stream Scheme is now open.

The scheme is open from 12:00pm on 23 September to 12:00pm on 21 October 2021.

What qualifications do I need?

GSR members come from a range of social science related backgrounds. A qualifying degree is one which contains substantial social research methods training (comprising around one third of modules taken in the course) including quantitative research methods and at least three of the following: systematic/literature reviews; qualitative methods; interpretation of data and presentation of results; study design and hypothesis testing; and application of ethics to research.

Eligibility Criteria

You are eligible to apply for the Civil Service Fast Stream if:


  
    You need, or should expect, to achieve a minimum of 2:1 in your undergraduate degree; or a 2:2 with a postgraduate degree.
  
  
    The qualifying degree must contain a minimum of 30% in social research methods covering all the criteria outlined below (it is not sufficient to hold the majority in one area – coverage across all areas is required)
  
  
    If you satisfy both the Nationality and Right to work/Immigration requirements.
  


It is the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate these criteria clearly on application.

Social Research Method Degree Content Criteria:

To qualify a degree must include quantitative research methods including research design, data collection (i.e. questionnaire design, sampling, weighting) and data analysis (e.g. statistical analysis).

It must also include at least three of the following:


  qualitative methods, including research design, data collection (i.e. interviewing, focus groups, ethnographic), data analysis (e.g. thematic analysis)
  study design, hypothesis formation, testing and evaluation
  systematic/literature reviews
  interpretation of data (qualitative and quantitative), presentation of results, provision of recommendations/ conclusions
  application of ethics to research


Professional Experience


  Hold an undergraduate degree, at a minimum of 2:1; or 2:2 with a postgraduate degree in any subject or a degree equivalent (e.g. Advanced Certificate or Diploma from MRS); And at have at least 4 years social research practice experience.
  Social research practice experience consists of experience working in a research agency, market research agency or specialist research team.
  To apply via this route you must make explicit the breadth and depth of your research experience and skills, which must include quantitative research methods and three of the following: systematic/literature reviews; qualitative methods; interpretation of data and presentation of results; study design and hypothesis testing; and application of ethics to research.


It is the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate these criteria clearly on their application.  Please ensure you indicate the number of credits associated with the relevant modules covering your social research methods training.  We receive a high volume of applications for the scheme, so please ensure you are clear and concise in outlining the relevant modules for consideration.

Nationality requirements

You are eligible to apply if you’re a:


  British citizen
  European Economic Area (EEA)
  Commonwealth citizen
  Swiss national
  Turkish national, in some circumstances


Individuals will need to demonstrate that they meet the relevant immigration requirements and their eligibility under the Civil Service Nationality Rules (CSNRs).  Nationality requirements are explained in more detail on the Civil Service nationality rules webpage

Right to work/Immigration requirements

You must have the right to work in the United Kingdom and meet the Immigration and Visa requirements for the scheme.

Further details can be found on the Gov.uk Visas and Immigration page

Please note that some departments require candidates to have a UK footprint for 3 years in order to get security clearance i.e. Defra, HMT, HO, MHCLG, MoJ and some other departments.

What would I do?

Government social researchers play a critical role in gathering analysing and interpreting the information that forms the foundation for decision-making affecting every UK resident. As a Research Officer (Fast Stream) working for a civil service organisation you can contribute to the reporting of social trends, the development of government policy and evaluation of how policies make a difference to public services. Your work might involve developing surveys, analysing data, producing statistics, reviewing existing research evidence and working with other analysts in government to provide timely, relevant and robust briefing for policy colleagues and Ministers.

Social Researchers working in departments and agencies

To find out more on the work of social researchers in some of the departments, please see the job specification documents at the top of this page.

Allocation to a GSR department

You will be placed into a department for your first posting in the GSR, with an expectation of starting in September 2021 (noting there can be some flexibility regarding personal circumstances) and that posting lasting at least 12 months. During the course of the scheme you will be rotated into differing posts on at least one occasion.

We will look at candidate’s preferences on the application form but as we are only expecting to be able to offer a very small number of places, the chances of meeting your preferences are significantly reduced. It is also worth remembering that starting your career in a department which is not your first choice can be very rewarding, particularly in terms of broadening your experience and furthering your career.

How much would I earn?

Salaries vary between departments. The average starting salary in London is about £27,000.

What is the Social Research Assessment Centre (SRAC)?

It is a half-day assessment centre to assess a candidate’s social research skills against set criteria. You should be aware that there may be periods of downtime in your timetable when you do not have to complete any exercises.  Each candidate completes the same series of exercises with the same amount of time to prepare, so time delays will not disadvantage or advantage you.

There are 3 separate social research exercises to complete at the SRAC.

The following guidance is aimed at helping you prepare beforehand so that you can demonstrate your full potential on the day. You will be asked to produce your written work on a computer.

You will be assessed against 3 competencies throughout the SRAC:


  social research professional expertise
  managing a quality service
  leading and communicating


You must reach the standard for all 3 competencies to pass SRAC.

Social research professional expertise


  has good knowledge of research methodology, method, techniques, (at e.g. degree level 2:1 or 1) and ability to apply these in small scale research projects
  is able to design small scale and less complex research projects, defining research questions and writing draft specifications
  is able to summarise and interpret information accurately, making use of different sources and to conduct basic analyses of key data sets utilising a working knowledge of relevant data analysis packages
  has good knowledge of legal and ethical issues and principles relating to social research.
  able to critically assess and evaluate information and evidence, assessing research findings, evaluating new ideas or methodologies)


What are the exercises I will complete at the SRAC?

The three exercises you will complete at the SRAC are:


  competency based interview
  oral briefing exercise
  social research knowledge test


Can you tell me more about each exercise and how I can prepare?

Oral briefing exercise

You will have 45 minutes to review some research data and prepare an oral briefing to give to two assessors who will be representing the perspectives of a policy professional and senior social researcher. You will then have 10 minutes to deliver your briefing, followed by up to 20 minutes of questions from the assessors. The oral-briefing exercise is what is termed a ‘work-simulation exercise’, i.e. it is designed to simulate aspects of the job to be performed and thus provide a basis for assessing the behaviours and competencies required in the job. All three competencies are assessed in this exercise.

The aim is that the exercise simulates a briefing you might be asked to do for a senior research colleague or a policy maker. During the 45 minutes you have to prepare for this exercise, you will be given a room to prepare in, instructions and research information to work with, and you will have to prepare an oral briefing based on the information provided. In the time allowed for preparation, you will be required to read and analyse research information (e.g. survey data) provided, which will relate to a particular policy area and prepare notes that will allow you to brief the assessors according to the instructions for the exercise.

You will then move to a room where the assessor panel made up of two people will be based and you will deliver the briefing to them for up to 10 uninterrupted minutes.  You will be stopped if you overrun. The assessors will take on the role of a policy or senior research colleague.

When you have finished delivering your briefing, the assessors will have up to 25 minutes to ask you further questions, exploring the ideas you have presented. This question and answer session is intended to allow the assessors to probe your depth of understanding of the issues, your ability to ‘think on your feet’, anticipate likely problems and your persuasiveness.

Please note that you are not expected to have any prior knowledge of the oral briefing subject matter; all the information you will need to complete the exercise is given to you with the instructions and any supporting information/materials supplied on the day

Competency based interview

You will be interviewed by two social research assessors for approximately 40 minutes. For the first 10 minutes you will be asked some follow up questions to the Knowledge Test. For 30 minutes the interview will focus on the following competencies: managing a quality service and leading and communicating; and will also include questions about your motivation for a career in Government Social Research and the application of social research in the real world.

NB: You should come prepared to talk about one or two examples from your own experience or from the public domain of when Social Research has had an impact either good or bad.

The assessors should introduce themselves to you and tell you all you need to know about how they will conduct the interview, for example how they will organise the questions between them, that you can clarify any questions which seem unclear to you, and that you will have the opportunity to ask questions. It is the assessors’ job to try and put you at ease from the beginning and then throughout the interview, they want to give every candidate the chance to show him or herself in the best possible light. They will want to know as much about you and your suitability for the fast stream as is possible in a limited period, so ensure that you make them aware of everything that you feel is relevant.

The interview is your chance to talk candidly about your abilities in relation to the competencies being tested. The questions have been designed to tell the assessors more about specific job-related abilities and will be looking to you to give relevant examples of your past experience. This can be experience from work, higher education or personal activities. You will need to tell the assessors in each case about the context of the situation, what you did and why you chose your course of action, and what the outcome was. Everyone’s interview should be similar: questions will be selected from the same core list. Obviously, any follow-up questions will depend on the answers you give and will not necessarily be the same as those for other candidates.

The questions may take the form of examples of previous behaviour, so might begin ‘Can you give me an example of when you have…’. Some questions might relate to hypothetical situations, so might begin ‘How would you go about…’.

Remember that you can decide what you are willing to discuss in your interview, and you can ask for information to be treated as confidential. You will not be penalised for not wanting to talk about issues that are sensitive to you. Any information that you ask to be kept confidential will only be shared with the other assessors if it has a direct bearing on the selection decision.

At the end of the interview you will usually be asked if you have any questions or whether there is anything else you want to add. Take your time to think. Ask any question you would like answered but do not ask just for the sake of it. If you realise you could have given a better answer to one of the assessors’ earlier questions, tell them briefly what you meant to say. If there is some relevant information that you neglected to mention – or a major achievement that you think is pertinent – do so at this point, but briefly. Finally, do not read too much into any interview that is slightly longer or shorter than the time estimated as assessor panels sometimes differ in how they divide up their questioning and use their time. Interviewers will be making notes throughout the interview so do not worry if they do not always maintain eye contact.

Social research knowledge test

You will have 50 minutes to answer the questions. There are 16 multiple choice questions and 4 questions allowing free format responses.

The test explores the basic knowledge and application of statistical, analytical and research skills and techniques.  The questions will cover basic statistical principals, use and interpretation of statistics, research methodology (including both quantitative and qualitative approaches) and the presentation of findings. Underlying issues such as practical problems in research design, ethics and the design of tools may also be covered.

Note that many of the questions contain data and results – all of these are invented and do not necessarily relate to the real world. You do not have to have any experience of working in any particular area (e.g. education, transport, law enforcement) to answer any of the questions.

You should attempt to answer as many questions, as quickly and as accurately, as you can.  You will not lose marks for incorrect answers.

All instructions will be given to you on the day, and you will have the opportunity to ask questions related to the instructions after they have been read out.

Deferrals

Candidates who pass the Social Research Assessment Centre and the Fast Stream Assessment Centre may only defer appointment to complete a postgraduate degree in a social science.

Deferrals are granted for a maximum of 12 months. Candidates who do not take up appointment within this period will need to re-apply for the Social Research Fast Stream scheme.

Fast Stream Assessment Centre (FSAC)

As part of the selection process successful candidates will also have to pass the Fast Stream Assessment Centre (FSAC) To find out more please go to the Fast Stream frequently asked questions page (FAQs).

For further information relating to the Government Social Research Service Fast Stream Scheme please visit the Fast Stream Social Research website

How to Apply

To apply please go to the Fast Stream Social Research Website




        
      

      
    Published 23 September 2016
    Last updated 3 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 December 2021
              Updated GSR Example Knowledge test
            
            
              28 September 2021
              Job description updated
            
            
              23 September 2021
              Scheme now open - Job descriptions updated
            
            
              22 October 2020
              The GSR 2021 Fast Stream Scheme is now closed.
            
            
              24 September 2020
              Update on scheme - scheme opening today
            
            
              24 October 2019
              The GSR 2020 Fast Stream Scheme closed at 12.00 noon (BST)
            
            
              7 October 2019
              New Job description for DHSC
            
            
              4 October 2019
              New Job Descriptions for CO, DCMS, DfE, FSA, HMRC, HO, MHCLG, MoJ and ONS
            
            
              19 September 2019
              2020 application dates, Nationality and Right to Work information added
            
            
              7 November 2018
              Changed the line after Applications to The GSR Fast Stream Scheme is now closed.
            
            
              27 September 2018
              Eligible degrees set out clearer to read
            
            
              11 September 2018
              We have removed and replaced the sentence after "Applications" subheading and also added new departments on the list whicha re  DIT, DfE, DEFRA, DH, SG and WG.
            
            
              25 October 2017
              amended application end date
            
            
              17 August 2017
              scheme dates added
            
            
              23 September 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        The Government Economic Fast Stream Scheme
        How to apply for a Government Social Research sandwich student placement
        The Government Economic Service Sandwich Student Placement Scheme
        Assistant Economist Scheme 2021
        Government Economic Service Summer 2021 Scheme - Cancelled

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability

  


  

  


    
  


    