
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Announcement of Opportunity: NASA Mars 2020 Returned Sample Science
  

  
  

  
    
  This is an ESA call for participating scientists to work on NASA’s Mars 2020 Perseverance mission, with UK Space Agency funding.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      2 April 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    NASA Mars 2020: Announcement of Opportunity
    
        PDF, 116KB, 5 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The preparation of a cache of martian rock and regolith samples for possible return to Earth via a future mission is a central objective of the NASA Mars 2020 mission.

This Returned Sample Science Participating Scientist Announcement of Opportunity of ESA seeks individuals whose addition to the mission’s science team will enhance the value of the samples to be selected, characterised, and cached by the NASA Mars 2020 Rover.

Successful applicants will be able to apply for UK Space Agency funding.

Specifically, Returned Sample Science Participating Scientist are sought to contribute to the following NASA Mars 2020 science team tasks:


  Identify, articulate and prioritise the scientific questions that may potentially be addressed through analysis of returned samples cached by the Mars 2020 Rover at its selected landing site.
  Using the rover’s instruments, characterise the geology of the landing site and its past habitability and potential for preservation of bio-signatures.
  Informed by the observations in 2., identify individual samples and suites of samples that can best meet the priorities identified in 1.
  Prepare detailed “field notes” that document both the geologic context and the rationale used for sample selection to a level that justifies return of samples to Earth.
  Participate in Science Team meetings and training events.
  Regularly contribute to daily rover operations during the surface mission, including serving in at least one operational role.



  Deadline for mandatory Letters of Intent submission: 15 April 2020
  Deadline for proposal submission, including letter of endorsement of financial support: 30 April 2020




        
      

      
    Published 2 April 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        James Webb Space Telescope/MIRI
        Jupiter icy moon explorer (JUICE)
        LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna)
        Steerable Thrusters
        Euclid

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    