
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Living in Bosnia and Herzegovina
  

  
  
  
      
  Information for British nationals living in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      10 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        10 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Coronavirus

        
        
          Health

        
        
          Education

        
        
          Entry and residence requirements

        
        
          Driving licences and vehicles

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview
This guide sets out essential information for British nationals residing in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including advice on health, education, benefits, residence requirements and more. We are unable to provide any guidance on general lifestyle enquiries apart from the information and links listed below.

See our information on what consulates can and cannot do for British nationals.

Coronavirus
You should follow the advice of the Bosnia and Herzegovina’s government and your local authority. You can also read our Bosnia and Herzegovina travel advice for our latest guidance.

For information on getting a COVID-19 vaccine as a UK national in Bosnia and Herzegovina see our coronavirus travel advice.

Health
Please note that GHIC card does not cover Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Health insurance is required for travelling to, as well as living in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

To request a residence permit you will need to get local health insurance. This can be done in local insurance companies Adriatic osiguranje and Uniqa osiguranje.

For more information please see our travel advice for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Education
Education in Bosnia and Herzegovina is regulated by the Ministry of  Education and Science of Federation and the Ministry of Education and Culture of Republika Srpska.

Education starts in either pre-schools or primary schools. Children enroll in primary nine-grade schools (Osnovna škola) at the age of 6. Primary education is compulsory to all children age 6 to 15 years and is free of charge.

Entry and residence requirements
A valid British passport must be held for entry to and exit from Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is no minimum passport validity requirement but you should ensure that your passport is valid for the duration of your visit. You should also ensure you get the stamp upon entering the country, as you may be fined upon your departure.

British passport holders do not need a visa for visits up to 90 days. Please visit the travel advice for Bosnia and Herzegovina for more information.

British nationals do not need a visa for Bosnia and Herzegovina for tourist visits up to 90 days. You must register with the local police within 24 hours of your arrival, unless you are staying in a hotel or official tourist accommodation, in which case you will be registered automatically.

If you do not register, you may be fined, detained or face a court appearance. You may also face difficulties upon your departure. If the company or person you are visiting is providing private accommodation for longer than 24 hours, they are required to submit an application for your residence to the police.

More information about residence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is available on the Ministry of Security website.

One of the requirements for residence permit is a Certificate of Good Conduct. The Embassy cannot issue this document. It can only be issued by your local Police in the UK.

Driving licences and vehicles
The British Embassy cannot issue or renew a UK driving licence. Please contact the DVLA for information about renewing a licence or applying for a new licence.

You must have your driving licence with you at all times when driving in/through Bosnia and Herzegovina. A UK driving licence is valid as long as you’re driving your own vehicle or a car hired outside of Bosnia. If you’re renting or using someone else’s vehicle within the country, an International Driving Permit is required. It should be obtained in the UK prior to travel.

To replace your foreign driving licence for a local one, you should contact the Ministry of Interior of the Canton you reside in for Federation Bosnia and Herzegovina or the Ministry of Interior Republika Srpska.

For further advice see the travel advice for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Disclaimer
This information is provided as a general guide and is based upon information provided to the embassy by the relevant local authorities and may be subject to change at any time with little or no notice. The FCDO and the British Embassy will not be liable for any inaccuracies in this information. British nationals wishing to obtain any further information must contact the relevant local authority.





      
        
    Published 10 March 2021
    Last updated 10 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 March 2021
              Coronavirus section added with a link to guidance on vaccines
            
            
              10 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Bosnia and Herzegovina: notarial and documentary services

  




      

    Collection

  


        Living in country guides

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Europe

  


  

  


    
  


    