
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    How to do business with Magnox Ltd
  

  
  
  
      
  How to find and apply for opportunities at Magnox.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Magnox Ltd

      
      Published
      15 August 2018
      Last updated
      
        25 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Procurement pledge

        
        
          Finding contract opportunities

        
        
          Find an opportunity with Magnox

        
        
          Invoices and payments

        
        
          Contacting us

        
        
          Modern slavery and human trafficking

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Magnox’s work can only be achieved through strong partnership with the supply chain.

Our suppliers form an integral part of the Magnox team which is committed to delivering a diverse and challenging programme of work across 12 sites in the UK. With each site at a different stage in its lifecycle, the requirements range from conventional services such as scaffolding and demolition, to the more specialist areas of waste retrieval and decommissioning.

If you would like to find out more about our recent supply chain webinar, or register for an ‘i2i’ session, please click here.

Procurement pledge

Magnox has signed up to the government’s pledge which lays out a number of initiatives that are designed to improve the way business is conducted with the private sector.

Finding contract opportunities

Magnox does not operate a preferred supplier list. We use an approach based on the value of the contract, and whether a public-sector framework already exists that can be used. Where existing frameworks cannot be used contract opportunities are awarded through open competition in line with the general European Treaty principles of non-discrimination, equal treatment and transparency, in order to ensure we provide value for money to the tax payer.

The Magnox Procurement Plan details procurement opportunities at the Magnox sites over the next 12 months. Published monthly, the detail contained in the plan is subject to review and change to meet the needs of the business. If you have any queries regarding procurement opportunities and/or contracts that have been awarded, please contact the named point of contact in the plan.

There may be opportunities to work with our suppliers to support our delivery, The procurement plan includes the names of suppliers who are currently tendering for opportunities and the name of suppliers where work has been awarded within the previous three months. In addition some opportunities with Tier 2 suppliers are listed in Contracts Finder.

Find an opportunity with Magnox

There are different ways to access contract opportunities with Magnox:


  Framework Contracts awarded by Crown Commercial Services


Magnox procures contracts through frameworks awarded by Crown Commercial Services (CCS) or other procurement hubs which can be used by the wider public sector.


  Complete Tender Management (CTM)


Magnox and the other site license companies within the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority estate use CTM to advertise and manage all tendered opportunities. To use CTM you will need to register your company. Once you are registered on the system, you can use it to manage your tendering activities.


  Contracts Finder


Procurements over the OJEU financial thresholds are also automatically advertised on the government’s
Contracts Finder portal and can be found on the OJEU website.

Invoices and payments

We operate a strict “no purchase order, no pay” policy. All invoices will need a Purchase Order reference. Your procurement contact should be able to supply this if you do not already have it.

Payment Performance Report

We publish payment performance reports on a six-monthly basis. The figures included in the report highlight our promptness in paying our suppliers and are expressed in percentage of payments made within 30 days and payments made over 30 days.

Contacting us

If your business has processes or engineering technologies that could support Magnox’s work at any of our 12 sites, please contact our supply team. The team can also answer questions, enquiries or issues about working with Magnox.

Contact our supply chain team: Magnox.supplier.queries@magnoxsites.com

Modern slavery and human trafficking

You can magnox’s statement on modern slavery and human trafficking here.

You can also contact the Modern Slavery Helpline on Tel: 08000 121 700 or online at:
http://www.modernslaveryhelpline.org. The helpline provides information and advice about modern slavery, a 24-hour telephone reporting line and an online reporting function through the website.




      
        
    Published 15 August 2018
    Last updated 25 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              25 November 2020
              We have added a link to our modern slavery and human trafficking statement
            
            
              10 November 2020
              We have added a link to our supply chain webinar information.
            
            
              29 August 2019
              We have updated the information on this page to reflect current procurement practices.
            
            
              28 November 2018
              New version of procurement plan added.
            
            
              5 November 2018
              An updated version of the Magnox Procurement Plan has been added.
            
            
              15 August 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Procurement Plan
        Sellafield Ltd Procurement Plan Schedule - November 2021
        Our Procurement Pledge
        Collaborative planning: a guide for Highways England supply chain

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    