Jonathan H. Cofer, director, Pentagon Force Protection Agency, hosts a Law Enforcement Week Observance ceremony at 9:30 a.m. EDT in the Pentagon Center Courtyard. This ceremony is a tribute to law enforcement officers who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty, and will recognize agency personnel who have earned the Secretary of Defense Medal for Valor, DOD's highest civilian award for valor, as well PFPA's 17 year anniversary.U.K. Maj. Gen. Chris Ghika, deputy commander, Stability, Combined Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve, briefs the press live from Baghdad at 11 a.m. EDT in the Pentagon Briefing Room (2E973) to provide an update on operations. Both U.S. and foreign journalists without a Pentagon building pass must be pre-registered in the new Pentagon Visitor Management System to attend the briefing; plan on being escorted from the River Entrance Pedestrian Bridge or the Pentagon Metro Entrance Facility only. Please arrive no later than 45 minutes before the briefing; have proof of affiliation and photo identification. Please call 703-697-5131 for any questions and escort into the building.  This briefing will also be streamed live on . Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Chair of Tropical Medicine Dr. David Brett-Major moderates a panel and speaks at the Texas A&M University and the George H.W. Bush School of Government & Public Service's Scowcroft Institute of International Affairs' 3rd Annual Pandemic and Biosecurity Forum, National Press Club, 529 14th St. NW, Washington, District of Columbia.Vice Adm. Nancy A. Norton, director, Defense Information Systems Agency, provides the keynote address at noon, and Chief Information Officer Dana Deasy and Army Gen. Paul M. Nakasone, commander, U.S. Cyber Command, and director, National Security Agency, participate in a fireside chat on driving a unity of effort at 3:45 p.m. EDT, at the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association TechNet Cyber, Baltimore Convention Center, One West Pratt St., Baltimore, Maryland.