
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus guidance for employees - Sellafield Ltd
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance documents and updates for Sellafield Ltd employees.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Sellafield Ltd

      
      Published
      25 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        16 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          COVID-19 – Line manager guide

        
        
          Home and remote working guidance during COVID-19

        
        
          Pay issues and policy/procedure changes update

        
        
          Test, track and trace system

        
        
          Test, track and trace: FAQs

        
        
          Key policies to enable home working

        
        
          IT security advice - general information

        
        
          My Contribution - Making Connections Count

        
        
          Employee support - Welfare and wellbeing

        
        
          Warrington offices

        
        
          Risk assessment, Hinton House

        
        
          Working arrangements – Hinton House

        
        
          Hinton House map

        
        
          Where to find the latest information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The COVID-19 pandemic is a fast moving situation. We are responding in line with government guidance and advice from the UK Health Security Agency.

We have an unprecedented amount of employees working remotely. This page is designed to provide our employees with easy access to the updates and guidance documents they need.

We are providing regular updates to our employees in the staff area of this website and on our social media channels.

This document is live and we are reviewing and updating it regularly, as appropriate.



COVID-19 – Line manager guide

This guidance document will outline the process for a line manager to follow when facilitating and supporting an employee back into the work place after a period of self-isolation, company isolation, sick leave (relating to COVID-19) and working from home.


  
      
  
  
    Occupational Health service provision - Sellafield sites
    
        PDF, 127 KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


It is important to acknowledge that returning to the workplace, after a long duration of time, may be daunting for employees, therefore this guide aims to provide a structured approach focussed on employee well-being, minimising uncertainty and anxiety

Step 1 - Employee Identified for restart

Owner: area lead


  Workplace compliant with social distancing measures, ensuring that workplace is set up for employee’s restart with appropriate governance in place
  Aligned with BRAG stages of key workers, decision made from coordinated recovery cell regarding approach of restart


Step 2 - Line manager contact employee to advise on restart date


  This will be a high-level conversation, outlining expected date and explaining the process for employee restart
  Line managers should also check on the welfare of the employee and understand if the individual has any pressing concerns regarding their restart
  Line managers should agree date and time with the employee to complete pre-restart conversation


Step 3 - Line manager contact employee to complete pre-restart conversation


  This conversation focusses on understanding employee’s current circumstances, aligned with whether they have been self-isolating (symptoms and/or vulnerable condition), company isolation or working from home
  If employees (or household members) have had symptoms of COVID-19 the line manager should check the duration of self-isolation. If the employee (or household member) is displaying symptoms of COVID-19 and have not met the appropriate self-isolation periods they should not restart work
  In addition, if the employee falls into one of the vulnerable categories, they should follow government guidelines and not restart work
  Line managers should also complete check in conversation to check on employee’s well-being and any concerns that they may have regarding restarting work
  See Appendix 1 (attached at the end of this section) for ‘pre-restart conversation’ proforma


Step 4 - Line manager conduct restart conversation with employee on first day


  Line managers should complete restart conversation with all employees, regardless of whether they have been self-isolating, company isolation, sick leave (relating to COVID-19) or working from home
  The intention of this conversation is to ensure that the employee is both physically and mentally fit to restart work
  Within the restart conversation the line manger should consider if there are any reasonable adjustments to be considered and if there is requirement for input from HR or OCH department.
  See Appendix 2 (attached at the end of this section) for ‘day 1 restart conversation’ proforma


Step 4.1 -  Consider if there are requirements for reasonable adjustments


  Everybody working at Sellafield Ltd needs to be able to work to the best of their ability for the success of the organisation and for their own personal and career development. Line managers should work with the employee to identify barrier they may face in the restart of work following COVID-19 and take reasonable steps to remove them.


Step 5 -  Line manager/senior line manager conduct team restart brief


  This brief could form part of normal daily POCCs, pre job briefings or be a specially arranged catch up session
  In line with “one collective” communications, the management should brief full teams (staff, contractors, ASWs, CSWs) on areas such as; safe working arrangements, changes to the workplace to be aware of and the importance of looking after each other’s physical and mental well-being
  Alongside this, outlining the continued requirements for social distancing and how this will be applied in their relevant areas
  It’s an opportunity for the workforce to be briefed and to ask questions on day to day working arrangements


Step 6 - Daily check-in conversations (welfare and symptom check)


  It’s expected that daily check in conversations take place for 14 days following an individual’s return to the workplace, then at line management discretion thereafter, dependent on employee need
  Where practically possible these should take place in person (applying social distancing requirements).


Welfare check

These check in conversations are a succinct 5 to 10 minute conversation with employees, checking in on welfare.

Following the My Contribution process, these conversations can be used to look at:


  Well-being: how is the employee feeling?
  Contribution: do they feel they have the right tools to deliver (tasks and actions),
  Look forward: is there anything that is concerning them over the coming day(s)
  Feedback: are there any further areas of support required from the line manager/company


Symptom check

Line managers should also check to ensure that the employee (or members of their household) have not started with any symptoms of COVID-19; if they have, the employee should be sent home, appropriate reporting/time booking codes used and government guidelines followed.

Appendix 1


  
      
  
  
    Annual Leave Carry-Over Alteration Form 2020/2021
    
        MS Word Document, 42.2 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


Appendix 2


  
      
  
  
    Keeping our workers safe during lockdown - Warrington Offices
    
        PDF, 3.04 MB, 4 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


Additional guidance for line managers

Please see section ‘Employee support - Welfare and wellbeing’ in this guidance document, should the employee require further support.

Guidance on the use of Occupational Health during Covid-19


  
      
  
  
    Covid-19 - Employee time and absence recording guidance
    
        MS Word Document, 22.9 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


HR operations contact: hr.operations@sellafieldsites.com

Home and remote working guidance during COVID-19

Introduction

This guidance is intended to provide current information to line managers and employees to support home or remote working required because of COVID-19.

It will be reviewed monthly, and may be revised or withdrawn at any time.

The guidance is separate to a longer-term strategy on agile, remote or connected working, although elements and learning from the COVID-19 arrangements may be considered for longer term adoption as appropriate.

Principles

The safety and welfare of employees is at the heart of all guidance.

The contract of employment is a feature in all that we do.

Pragmatism and trust are fundamental principles in our guidance and all efforts should be made to work to its intent with flexibility and through a trusting relationship between line managers and employees.

Line managers and employees should refer to the hierarchy of attendance criteria to inform discussion and decision making.

The hierarchy of how people should prioritise their attendance is:


  work from home, which may include attending the workplace as required and as appropriate
  work from an off-site location
  attend the main Sellafield site


Line manager role

Line managers should consider job role and activities and the most effective way of delivering the various elements of this.

Team members should feel that they have a safely assessed and appropriate environment and support to work collaboratively and productively each day.

Regular catch-ups and performance reviews should continue to take place with all employees, irrespective of their place of work.

The catch-ups should consider health and wellbeing, general guidance as well as reviewing work and delivery of outcomes.
 
Line managers should ensure employees have accessed the Display Screen Equipment (DSE) assessment via ATLAS.

They should also offer the appropriate support through the return to work process.

To access the DSE assessment on ATLAS, one of our DSE assessors can send an ATLAS DSE link to employees. DSE assessors’ names can be found on the conventional safety intranet page.

Further details can be found in the Sellafield Ltd Management System – Control of Display Screen Equipment.

Working hours

This should be read in conjunction with the pay policy COVID-19 guidance.

Where possible all employees should be actively working towards fulfilling their contract of employment.

Employees should give consideration as to how they manage their working day and be mindful of working within the working time regulations, avoiding the risk of working longer hours, as there is not the same trigger to switch off if they don’t have to travel home.

Employees should record their actual working hours in line with departmental arrangements in OPMS, adhering to the COVID-19 time booking guidance.

Managers have a responsibility to check in with their teams to ensure the arrangement continues to support the individual and the business.

Please note that any additional (credit) hours over normal working hours need to be pre authorised by the line manager, as per terms and conditions.

Where working from home is combined with specific “non-work” activities, for example meeting a tradesman or attending an appointment, the time used for these should be covered by existing mechanisms in T&Cs.

Home office, DSE assessment and workplace adjustments

Homeworkers with remote network access should complete the ATLAS DSE Assessment. If a wider risk assessment incorporating factors beyond DSE (e.g. heating or ventilation) is required, then this should be discussed with the line manager to discuss adjustments.

Once homeworkers have completed their DSE assessment, they should discuss any shortfalls with their DSE assessor to identify potential solutions and then discuss with their line manager.

If employees need equipment that they normally have at work (chair, large screen, wrist pads etc.) then they should speak to their line manager and it may be possible to arrange for it to be collected from their previous workplace.

Employees working from home are responsible for the condition of their home-working environment. The environment should be conducive to such work and all the necessary equipment should be fit for purpose.

It’s also recommended that individuals and line managers discuss the balance between home working and coming into the workplace to understand the most effective arrangement to allow the employee to work at their best.

Wellbeing

The physical and mental wellbeing of employees is a key feature of the regular check-ins with the line manager.

Employees should:


  keep up regular contact with their manager and colleagues
  take regular breaks
  visit the EDI hub for guidance on health and well being
  contact the Employee Assistance Programme if they’d like professional support
  stay mentally and physically active
  continue to take annual leave in the normal way so that they have proper breaks from work
  check the intranet regularly if possible for wellbeing updates


Caring responsibilities

Discuss working arrangements with line managers to allow for a flexible approach, which balances caring responsibilities with the delivery of work.

Arrangements should be reviewed regularly with line managers, who will be working in line with the mechanisms in place - this does not change existing contractual arrangements.

If an employee would like to make a more permanent change to their working pattern, they should refer to the flexible working policy and guidelines as outlined in the terms and conditions and apply through the usual route.

Normal role

As far as possible employees should continue to carry out their normal role, supported where possible with appropriate technology (laptop, blackberry) and IT access.  If this is an issue, it should be raised with the line manager.

It may not always be possible for an employee to carry out their normal role; however, the line manager may be able to define alternative tasks appropriate to grade. This may need collaboration with others in the immediate or broader teams.

Improvement activity and additional work packages

In line with the principles of My Contribution, all roles have an element of improvement activity that can be delivered. Employees should look at aspects of their role, or the team’s broader roles, that could be improved - processes or systems, or the way we do things.

Managing your work

Employees working remotely or from home must continue to adhere to all Sellafield Ltd policies in the same way as if in their normal workplace.

The working week should be structured so that employees can continue to be effective. This may require employees to attend the workplace to provide structure to their home working arrangements and ensure their personal well-being.

It’s recognised that flexibility will be required across all roles (e.g. individuals who work on plant may also be required to carry out tasks which do not require them to be plant based).

Employees working from home should be working in alignment with their personal and team objectives, or the current needs of our COVID-19 response.

Regular catch-ups and review of work should continue to take place with all employees, via an appropriate method.

An employee who is working from home should consider their own effectiveness at home and how they will manage potential sources of interruption. Issues should always be discussed with their line manager.

It is recognised that in some roles, owing to the nature of their duties or personal circumstances, it may not be an appropriate option to work from home.  In this instance, office working may be required.

Sickness/Absence

If an employee is sick and unable to work, they should inform their manager in the usual way on their first day of absence, before 9:00am so the line manager can record the absence and support their recovery.

Daily logistics

Employees working from home should be contactable during their normal working hours.

Employees should always make it clear to colleagues where they are working (for example, by stating this in their calendar) and how best to contact them (via email and specific phone number).

Employees should set up an out of the office message that tells people how to contact them and their current working arrangements.

Anyone with a company phone/blackberry, should set an appropriate voicemail message and also set their Skype/Lync location appropriately.

Meetings may take place using appropriate technologies to facilitate the participation of employees working from home.

Employees should be aware that home working does bring a range of responsibilities and the company still expects its employees to behave in line with the nuclear professionalism standards and expectations.

For example, in line with Standard 9 (personal responsibility), employees are expected to behave in a manner which does not discredit the company.

Likewise, employees should continue to be vigilant when accessing social media, by never connecting to accounts via company IT equipment (without explicit prior permission) and ensuring they do not post specific information about their job.


  Reminder – as people are “at work”, all rules and procedures still apply in line with company standards and expectations. Behavioural expectations should be followed (for example, alcohol consumption is still prohibited during the working day).


Employees must be available to attend work, to carry out some of their duties or attend meetings, if requested and agreed with their line manager.

Security

The company has made huge strides in providing IT equipment, with many employees now owners of RSA tokens, laptops and surface pros, as well as Blackberry’s and phones.

In addition; Microsoft Teams, Office 365 and the NDA Hub are all options being utilised as appropriate.

Employees should look out for regular updates on the intranet or staff news and information area of the external Sellafield website as new options are being released all the time.

Ideally, most people will be able to avoid printing for work purposes while they do not have access to a work printer.

If printing a work document is essential, then employees should speak to their line manager to arrange to go into an office to use the printers there.

While using these different technology options and working from home, employees must comply with the company’s cyber security guidance.

The security guidance applies to electronic and ‘hard copy’ information. When handling hard copy information/data with a higher protective marking than ‘OFFICIAL’, employees should seek guidance from their line manager and/or the Information Security Team.

Training, development and upskilling

Employees should continue to be creative and search out opportunities to develop, learn and self-improve.

Line managers should ensure time is made available to employees to support self-development and give guidance on what is suitable and in line with performance plans.

As well as the huge amount of opportunities and material available on the internet, the EDI hub also has a wealth of support material and upskilling options.

A number of employees also have access to the Leadership Academy VLE – this holds a wide range of resources and materials.

The VLE can be accessed from non-networked devices, any eligible employees who haven’t got an account can contact the leadership.academy@sellafieldsites.com so that one can be created for them.

The Union Learning Centre is also a useful source of development.

Insurance

Sellafield Ltd Employers Liability Insurance covers employees working from home. This insurance policy is placed by the NDA.

The Association of British Insurers says:


  If you are an office-based worker and need to work from home because of government advice or because you need to self-isolate, your home insurance cover will not be affected.


The ABI go on to state that there is no need to contact your insurer to update cover or extend your cover in the circumstances that you are currently working from home due to following government advice or the need to self-isolate.

So even if a home working arrangement appears to be ‘long term’, it’s not a permanent arrangement.

Supporting this, most insurers say that if you work from home occasionally, you are not classed as permanently working from home.

Any incident resulting in an injury which may result in a claim should be reported to your line manager as soon as possible and a condition report raised on ATLAS.

Equipment and expenses

Sellafield Ltd is working with employees to loan peripheral IT equipment (e.g. screen, mouse, keyboard) and office equipment/stationery where required to support home working in-line with DSE assessments.

This includes where possible to do so, specialist equipment that has previously been identified for reasonable adjustments. Employees should discuss any reasonable adjustments with their line manager.

If employees have a business need for a mobile phone, then the business case for a Sellafield Ltd procured phone should be made in the usual way.

Sellafield Ltd will not normally cover expenses but are willing to consider any specific issues on a case by case basis.

Employees working from home may not claim travel expenses between home and their normal Sellafield Ltd work location.

Travel between working hours will be managed in line with existing arrangements.

Pay issues and policy/procedure changes update

Principles:


  
    arrangements must be simple to understand and implement
  
  
    the intent is to minimise the risk of people attending work when unwell and to support UK government policy on the pandemic response
  
  
    new policy arrangements which constitute a temporary change to the T&C’s will need to be discussed and agreed with the unions. Consultation with a view to agreement will take place on all other arrangements in this documentation.
  
  
    these arrangements are temporary. They will be reviewed and updated every 3 weeks or at the point of any change in government policy. They may be withdrawn at any time with reversion to standard arrangements where this occurs.
  
  
    helping all employees to return to working (at work, or remotely) in line with the basic expectations of their contract whilst still adhering to government advice and the enterprise risk assessment  is the frame of reference for policy
  


Pay, reward and time arrangements


  
    this policy (version 7) is valid from 01 October 2020
  
  
    Payment and time adjustments from version 6 of the policy are made for the period 01 July 2020 to 30 September 2020
  
  
    a change from version 6 of the policy is the withdrawal of employee categories 4 and 7 – reverting to agreed T&C’s, in line with principle clause above.
  


There are 5 categories of employee, emergent from the ongoing COVID-19 arrangements as explained below:

The policy is structured around these employee categories. A series of payment or time adjustments are made relative to employee categorisation which are listed here:


  
    
      Employee category
      Basic pay and bonus
      Shift allowance
      Level allowance
      Accured days
      Excess Mileage
    
  
  
    
      Determining reason for adjustment
      Availability to work
      Choice of time geography
      Choice of geography
      Time worked
      Travel
    
    
      Category 1
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
    
    
      Category 2
      Unaffected
      Adjusted
      Adjusted
      Unaffected
      Adjusted
    
    
      Category 3
      Unaffected
      Adjusted
      Adjusted
      Adjusted
      Adjusted
    
    
      Category 5
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Adjusted
    
    
      Category 6
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Unaffected
      Adjusted
      Adjusted
    
  


It is recognised that movement between the categories is a dynamic situation and may change over time.

For those employees who may be required to attend their normal workplace but are following government guidelines in not attending, please read the unavailable to work section in this document.

Categorisation of employees and the associated adjustments are determined between the line manager and employee and relate to the category (1, 2, 3, 5 or 6) in which the employee spends the majority of their time (50% or more).

Unavailability for work is exempt from the clause above and can be on a full or part time basis. Further detail is included in the section ‘Unavailability for work’.

Should an employee disagree with their categorisation, all efforts should be made to resolve locally but where this is not possible the company complaints process should be used.

Reasons for being available but unable to work from home or remotely (in categories 3 and 6) may include a lack of IT or work pack provision.

Adjustments

Accrued day and additional rest days (ARD) adjustments are in line with the standard NSBS calculation for long term sickness absence, for example:


  for day workers, a day a month is deducted
  for 5DDD workers, a day for every 5 weeks is deducted
  for 7DDD workers, a day for every 9 weeks is deducted


The OMPA form will be submitted by line management to NSBS to stop automatic level allowance payments being made for employees in categories 2 and 3.

Excess mileage payments are stopped on an automatic basis, with any claims being made on an as needs basis in line with standard arrangements.

For employees in categories 2 and 3 where it is the employees’ decision not to attend the workplace - if this results in not working shifts then shift allowance is stopped on a temporary basis through the OMPA form in line with T&C’s.

Sickness absence

Payment of allowances at the point of absence is carried into the period of absence (I.e. if an employee is not receiving shift or level allowance ((categories 2 and 3)) this remains the case into sickness absence). Accrued time adjustments are as standard in line with the T&C’s.

Unavailability for work

Categories 4 and 7 were withdrawn on 30 September 2020. Both pertained to employees who were self-declared as unavailable for work, either attending the workplace - or working from home / remotely.

The arrangements for those who declare they are unavailable for work are as such;


  
    For those who can demonstrate a reasonable and proportionate link to the UK COVID-19 arrangements, then voluntary measures such as;
  
  
    Retaining substantive employee category but using annual leave or credit time to cover, or,
  
  
    Not having a substantive category and instead being unavailable for work and taking unpaid leave, part time contracts or career breaks may be used.
  


For those employees who cannot demonstrate a reasonable and proportionate link to the UK COVID-19 arrangements, then this is considered in the same manner as unavailability for work would be treated outside of COVID-19 arrangements, with standard company conduct or performance processes applied.

It should be noted that use of the ‘domestic’ time-booking codes return to their previous pre-covid-19 purposes and should not be used to unavailability for work. This should instead be booked to the covering mechanisms.

Track and trace / quarantine

Employees who have to self-isolate for 14 days under track and trace arrangements are considered to be of their original categorisation for the period in which they are self-isolating (i.e. a category 1 employee asked to self-isolate remains a category 1 employee for the period of self-isolation).

For any employees who are abroad at the time of a quarantine announcement in the country they are visiting.

The quarantine period should be treated in the same way as above.

For any employees who travel abroad knowing that quarantine will be required on their return, then the quarantine period should be covered with annual leave, credit/debit time or unpaid leave. Where employees can work from home, in agreement with line management, they should.

For any exemptions from quarantine arrangements, there is separate guidance which should be followed and can be found on the ‘Coronavirus guidance for employees’ section of our website.

For approved exemptions, this section does not apply. For non-approved exemptions then the above section applies.

Working to cover other staff absences (same grade)


  employees may be asked to work additional hours or attendances to cover the absence of colleagues
  this should be limited to covering essential, business critical or safety critical work, as defined by a senior (suggest Band 2) manager
  exception arrangements should be used to cover additional attendances


Working to cover other staff absences (different grade)


  employees may be asked to cover other roles to cover the absence of colleagues
  this should be limited to covering essential, business critical or safety critical work, as defined by a senior (Band 2) manager
  employees asked to work at a higher grade will be paid using the temporary promotion or substitution arrangements, depending on duration (substitution up to one month, temp promotion more than one month)
  employees asked to work at a lower grade will retain their normal pay
  this work would be in exceptional circumstances, and is subject to satisfying the necessary SQEP requirements, and will be done in consultation with the relevant unions


People joining the organisation and employees currently in their probation period

Any new recruits who self-isolate before starting or who are asked by the company not to physically begin work on the original timescale will have their contractual start dates honoured and will be paid from that date.

Probation periods will be extended for new starters (not able to physically begin work as planned) by the duration of the delay in beginning physical employment.

Employees currently in their probationary period who self-isolate will have their probationary period extended by the duration of the self-isolation.

Maternity cases

Normally, an employee who goes off sick for a pregnancy related reason during the last 4 weeks prior to the due date will trigger the start of their maternity leave period. This requirement will be suspended for sickness absence or self-isolation related to corona virus.

Sickness absence processes

Standard self-certification processes will be suspended, with employees able to self- certify for the complete period of self-isolation (currently 14 days).

Employees who are absent on sick due to self-isolation or sickness related to coronavirus COVID-19 will not be managed via the standard escalating process (trigger level reviews).

The clause in version 6 of this policy that “Any episodes of sickness that are as a direct result of COVID-19 absences trigger a guaranteed extension of up to 6 calendar weeks (or up to 2 weeks if the standard 4 week extension has already been used) on the exhaustion of company sick pay.” is withdrawn, with any extensions to company sick pay reverting to T&C’s i.e. on a case by case basis.

Line managers are expected to continue to exercise their duty of care and to manage to the trigger level process in terms of reviewing and considering any support arrangements necessary.

Conduct whilst self-isolating


  employees who are self-isolating, whether working from home or not, are expected to comply with government/NHS guidance in relation to limiting their exposure to other people and social groups
  employees who are self-isolating and who are found not to be limiting their exposure to others may find themselves subject to the disciplinary procedure


Relaxation of annual leave carry over arrangements

Recognising that current restrictions came into effect from 16th March 2020 there is a relaxation of normal carry over arrangements for the last leave year (2019/2020), this year (2020/2021) and next year (2021/2022).

The exact details of the changes are outlined below:


  
    2019/2020 - All employees can carry over up to a maximum of 20 days without the need for director approval (this includes carry over limits as detailed current T&C’s of employment)
  
  
    2020/2021 - All employees can carry over up to a maximum of 20 days without the need for director approval (this includes carry over limits as detailed current T&C’s of employment)
  
  
    2021/2022 – All employees will be allowed up to 15 days without the need for director approval (this includes carry over limits as detailed current T&C’s of employment)
  
  
    Any requests to carry over more than the numbers stated above will be reviewed and would be approved by the HR director on a case by case basis
  
  
    ‘Normal’ (5 or 10 days depending on T&C’s) will resume from 2022/2023
  


Selling Annual Leave

All employees have the option to ‘sell’ back any leave they cannot or do not want to take during the 2020/21 leave year.

Under this temporary arrangement for 2020/2021 leave year employees on PLC and 2016 Terms and Conditions will have the new option to sell up to 5.5 days back to the company.

When doing this the value of leave will be based on practice currently used by NSBS when buying out excess leave on resignation/retirement. (1 day = total annual salary including allowances/261 Working days per year or as adjusted for shift workers).

For employees on engineering terms and conditions who already have the option to sell up to 5.5 days per year (at 0.33% of salary), the calculation for selling those days in the 2020/21 leave year, becomes the same as for PLC and 2016 Terms (1 day = total annual salary including allowances/261 Working days per year or as adjusted for shift workers).

In addition, there is no requirement to take the required 20 days before selling the 5.5 days in this clause in the 2020/21 leave year.

Working pattern changes

Extended and extensive reductions in the numbers of employees able to attend work may require changes to attendance patterns and hours worked.

Basic pay will remain unchanged regardless of hours worked for employees in categories 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6.

Unless otherwise stated on this policy, all allowances are subject to the standard arrangements in T&C’s or relevant agreements. Secondments or temporary changes in shift patterns are treated in line with standard T&C’s.

Allowances for working non-standard shift patterns will be dealt with using exceptions agreements/essential worker agreement, but payment for ongoing and very unusual patterns will be discussed and agreed with the relevant trade union.

Any changes will be carried out via consultation with the relevant unions.

On call

The current voluntary arrangements may need to be strengthened for certain groups by making on call a contractual requirement.

The on call allowance in this circumstance will be discussed and agreed with the relevant trade union.

Mileage claims

Any mileage claims made should only be for those journeys which are in excess of a standard commute to an employee’s ‘normal’ place of work.

Volunteers, reservists etc.

For any employee who is deployed to assist UK national efforts in support of response to the pandemic (e.g. reservists, NHS recalls, special constables etc.), these will be treated as a secondment with pay and terms unaffected. Guidance should be sought from HR in these instances.

Test, track and trace system

Our test, track and trace system for COVID-19 is based on the car park of the former Sellafield Visitors’ Centre at Yottenfews.

The system has been developed in conjunction with the government, the NDA and regulators.

Our testing system will be available for all Sellafield Ltd employees - their households, ASWs, CSWs and our supply chain contractors who work on the Sellafield site.

Of course, people can still opt to use the national contract tracing programme and testing centres – but having a testing facility at Sellafield will give us a local capability to conduct rapid checks for those displaying COVID-19 symptoms (results are usually confirmed within 1.5 to 3 hours of taking the test).

If you start to display COVID-19 symptoms (high fever, a new and persistent cough, or the sudden loss of taste and smell), you should immediately notify your line manager, team leader or contract manager.

The manager will then be able to book an appointment by calling 019467 85829. You will then be contacted directly by the test, track and trace team to confirm when and how you should attend the facility.

Only people who have an allocated time slot booked can attend and they will need to confirm their identity with their P4 pass at the testing facility.

People who have booked a test will be able to drive onto the testing site and remain in their car throughout the process, collecting the test kit, conducting the test themselves in their car, depositing the test kit, and remaining self-isolated in their car while they wait for the results. Analysis will be carried out on a mobile, temporary laboratory also on the same site.

They will receive the results quickly, via text message. If a result is positive then the person will be directed to self-isolate at home while a follow-up test will be conducted on the sample you have already provided. Our track and trace team will follow up to identify whether any other employees could potentially be at risk and arrange a test for them too.

Test and trace animations

We appreciate that our service might be confusing, especially if you have not yet used it.

So, we’ve produced 4 short animations which help explain the process.

They help explain what you should do if:

You have symptoms of coronavirus

If you have symptoms

You manage someone who has symptoms

If you manage someone who has symptoms

You think you’re a close contact of someone with the virus

You think you’re a close contact of someone with the virus

You have been invited for a COVID-19 test by one of our test and trace team

You have been invited for a COVID-19 test

Our FAQs below also provide more detail on the test, track and trace system.

Test, track and trace: FAQs

Who is this testing system for?

This system is primarily designed to protect our ability to operate the Sellafield site safely and securely - and was developed with site operations in mind.

We are sufficiently confident in the capacity to broaden its availability to all Sellafield Ltd employees - their households, ASWs and CSWs, as well as our site-based contractors (i.e. contractors actively working on the site at the point they need a test).

It is not for the wider public, relatives of employees or supply chain partners not actively working on the Sellafield site. They should use the national testing facilities available to everyone.

How do you arrange a test?

People who are showing symptoms of the virus can be referred for a test by their line manager, team leader or contract manager. They should make a booking by calling 019467 85829.

The symptoms are:


  a high temperature
  a new, continuous cough
  a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste


Once the test is booked by the line manager, the individual will be contacted by a member of the test, track and trace team with details of how to access the centre and how to take the test, along with details of what happens afterwards.

I’m a line manager - employee showing symptoms. What should I do?

You should recommend that the employee takes a test and check that they are willing to do so. Then please book a test by calling 019467 85829.

Once the test is booked, the individual will be contacted with details of how to access the centre and how to take the test, along with details of what happens afterwards.

How does the testing process work?

We are using an initial rapid test to quickly establish whether an employee may have COVID-19. If this is the case, the employee will be asked to self-isolate while the sample is sent off-site for a second check to confirm whether they have COVID-19.

The rapid test typically takes between 1.5 and 3 hours, while the second test takes 24 hours.

If the rapid test is positive, they should continue to self-isolate. The Sellafield Ltd contact tracing team will then contact the individual to try and identify people who have come into close contact with them.

They will use the following criteria to define ‘close contact’. This covers the 48 hours before the person started displaying COVID-19 symptoms:


  face-to-face contact with someone (less than 1 metre away)
  spending more than 15 minutes within 2 metres of someone
  travelling in a car or other small vehicle with someone (even on a short journey)


All of the above scenarios should be avoided anyway by people following the guidance in the Enterprise Risk Assessment. But in cases where people have potentially been at risk, they will be advised to conduct their own test to check. This will help minimise the spread.

What are the different results I could receive, and what happens next?

If the result is negative and you feel well enough, you can return to work.

If the result is negative and you don’t feel well enough, you should contact your line manager to follow normal sickness absence procedures.

If the result is indeterminate, then you may need to attend for another test to be undertaken and the on-site team will advise you of this.

If the result is positive, the test will be sent for further analysis, which could take a further 24 hours. You should notify your line manager remotely, return home and self-isolate while awaiting the result of the second test.

If the second test is positive, you should contact your line manager and then follow the NHS guidance on self-isolation for those with COVID-19.

Who will you share my results with?

We will collate the results and if a result is positive, we will also share it with Public Health England. We have a duty to do this because COVID-19 is a notifiable disease.

Do I have to take a test?

If you are showing symptoms of COVID-19, it is your decision whether to take a test or not. If you do not take a test, you are obliged to self-isolate for 7 days from when the symptoms started, as a precautionary measure, even if you feel you are getting better.

Can I book a test for myself?

Line managers need to have visibility of what’s happening to understand your welfare needs and be able to follow up appropriately once the results come through, so they need to book the test for you (but you should attend the test on your own).

My line manager isn’t available. How do I access a test?

If your line manager is not available, then a delegate will be able to book a test on their behalf. This will either be an alternative manager in your area of their business, or your line manager’s manager.

What if I’m displaying symptoms in the evening or night shift when the testing centre isn’t operating?

Anyone displaying symptoms should isolate themselves quickly, so contact your team leader and make the necessary arrangements to leave the workplace, return home and then take the test during the hours of operations (typically 9am to 3pm, although this will be reviewed according to demand).

I would like to have a test for reassurance. Do I need to book one? Can I just turn up?

Only those who are displaying symptoms or who have recently come into close contact with someone who has the condition can take a test (see above for definition of symptoms and close contact).

You cannot turn up without booking a test. Those who do will be turned away.

How does my line manager book an appointment?

Your line manager should call 019467 85829 to book a test.

Do I have to provide the details of people I have been in close contact with?

You are not legally obliged to disclose this information if you do not want to. However, if you do not share this information, we cannot prevent the spread. This will put other people at risk.

Do the test, track and tracing team have access to my personal information?

For Sellafield Ltd employees, the test, track and trace team will take your preferred mobile contact number and will have access to the following information from OPMS once your test is booked:


  first name
  last name
  PeopleSoft ID
  DOB
  job title
  business unit
  emergency contact phone number (if provided in OPMS)


Contractors will be asked to provide their name, phone number, company name and security pass details.

The test, track and tracing team will only know who you have come into close contact with by speaking to you to find this out.

How secure is my personal information?

Your personal data will only be used for the purpose of identifying those you have come into close contact with. 
Your data will be deleted a maximum of 28 days after the testing centre closes.

How quickly will I get my result?

The rapid test is able to provide results within 1.5 to 3 hours of taking the test.

How will I get my result?

This will be sent to you via text message to the mobile phone number you give when accessing the testing service.

What should I do immediately after taking the test while waiting for my result?

There is a designated parking area at the testing facility, and you should remain isolated in your car. The on-site team will advise if there is any change to this (eg if there are expected delays in results being provided).

You can discuss with your line manager in advance whether it would be appropriate for you to return home while awaiting the result.

Is this testing system different to the government’s national one?

The rapid testing system is already being used in other areas of the UK as a supplementary system to the national one. The rapid test takes 1.5 to 3 hours for a result, while the national testing takes 24 hours.

All positive results on the rapid test will then be further verified by checking on the 24-hour national system. This helps provide a quick testing system for nuclear workers, but anyone is also entitled to use the national system by booking it directly themselves.

We have worked with the government to develop our approach to testing and will be reporting positive test results into the national system.

I work with someone and they have got COVID-19. I’ve not been contacted by a track and trace team. Should I self-isolate?

You should only self-isolate if you have been advised to do so by the NHS track and trace team.

If you develop symptoms of COVID-19 then you can arrange to take a test – either through Sellafield Ltd or the NHS.

I want to self-isolate. Can I?

You should only self-isolate if you have been advised to do so by the NHS track and trace team.

If you are not contacted by them, then you should continue to come to work.

Do I have to use the Sellafield testing facility if I feel unwell and I’m not at work?

If you have symptoms of COVID-19, you should try and get tested as soon as possible.

You do not need to use the Sellafield test facility, you could book a test through the NHS.

What do I do if I am unsure if I should take a test?

As each instance unique, if you feel the guidance doesn’t cover your own circumstances, please speak to the test facility. They will have the final view on whether they can offer a test.

Key policies to enable home working


  
      
  
  
    How do I manage information classified as OFFICIAL?
    
        PDF, 126 KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  
      
  
  
    How do I manage information marked OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE?
    
        PDF, 137 KB, 15 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  
      
  
  
    Security Operating Procedures for Information Communications and Technology
    
        PDF, 109 KB, 13 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


Note: The temporary advice found in this document supersedes equivalent advice found within equivalent company policies and procedures. Where discrepancies in the advice given occurs, please follow the advice within this document or contact cyber.security@sellafieldsites.com for further advice.

Use of corporate devices

Wherever practicable, remote working should be undertaken on corporate laptops with remote access capability, or via corporate BlackBerry mobile devices.  These may be used to process information up to and including OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE with descriptor e.g. PERSONAL, COMMERCIAL or SNI.

Corporate devices should only be connected to the RAS over trusted personal wifi. They must not be connected directly to wifi for internet browsing or any other connected service without the use of RAS.

An ethernet cable (other than the corporate network) must not be used without raising an IT service request and authorisation from the cyber security team.

It is understood that wifi must be enabled in order to connect to RAS, however, we stipulate that when RAS is not being used, e.g. “going offline” to lessen the load on the network, that wifi is also turned off. If you do not have remote access to the network, you must not connect your Sellafield Ltd laptop to wifi or browse the internet.

Corporate desktops must not be removed from Sellafield facilities - they have not got the correct packages installed for homeworking.

If individuals need to take any other IT equipment home, such as screens/ keyboards/ monitors etc. Line Manager approval is required. Line Managers should keep a record of all IT equipment taken home.

Use of personal devices

A personal device may include a personal phone, tablet, laptop/Mac or home PC.

The NDA Hub is now open for use by any individual with a Sellafield Ltd network account on their personal device. This is the most secure and preferred method of accessing OFFICIAL (marked or unmarked) information on personal devices.

The MS Teams App is now available for mobile users. This platform can be used for file sharing and video conferencing up to OFFICIAL and will soon support file sharing and document creation using Office 365.

Even when using this service, it is strongly recommended to apply the below advice:


  make sure your devices and software are fully up-to-date with software and security patches
• secure your device with a unique password/code/phrase
• ensure the device is running current and up to date anti-virus / security solution (Such as Windows Defender) (Sellafield Ltd will not fund this)
  Sellafield data is not to be stored on any personal cloud service (e.g. DropBox, GoogleDrive, Microsoft Office365)
  Sellafield data is to be deleted from the machine as soon as practicable
  lock your devices when not in use. Physical access is the most dangerous and small children may not realise the implications of accidentally emailing your OFFICIAL document to all your contacts.
  finally, be careful on social media, personal devices come with enhanced abilities to share information to the public domain.


Where The NDA Hub cannot be used the advice above is compulsory.

Who do I contact if I want to speak to somebody about my IT query/update or report an IT issue?

You can log a new incident yourself using ServiceNow via the IT Portal, and the IT Service Desk will contact you. Alternatively, you can call 019467 71180 between the hours of 7:00am to 5:30pm.

If you have an IT query please send an email to iso.service.operations@sellafieldsites.com and the team will contact you.

Please Note: P1 and P2 calls cannot be reported via the IT Portal.

Please do not call for a status update on a request – particularly one for a new remote access token, as these requests are slowing down this work.

How do I access the network remotely?

If you have an RSA token (SecurID), please log in as normal using Pulse Secure, connect to the network and allow it to synchronise automatically. Once connected, your Outlook folders will update (e.g. emails). You will also be able to access your file shares, folders and documents.

Pulse Secure and Remote Access Service (RAS) instructions:


  
      
  
  
    Pulse Secure instructions
    
        MS Word Document, 133 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


If you have difficulty establishing a connection, you will need to run a batch file which is located on your C drive (C:\AnyConnectReset\RSA.bat).


  
      
  
  
    Instruction on running the RSA.bat fix
    
        MS Word Document, 252 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


Please note: The batch file must only be run when connected via Wi-Fi. Do not run this batch file when you are on site and plugged into the network. This batch file will not resolve password issues.

You should download any documents that you wish to read/update, save them to your P drive then disconnect from the network.  Please do not stay connected all day as there are a large number of people utilising the network and we need to give everyone the opportunity to connect

When you have finished your work for the day, you should reconnect to the network and move the documents from your P drive to the appropriate file shares and folders.

You can send emails whilst disconnected, they will be stored in your Outbox and will be automatically sent when you reconnect to the network.

Why am I seeing a work offline pop-up on my laptop?

From Monday 30th March we introduced a new procedure whereby after 2 hours of continuous log-in time the system will ask if you wish to extend your session, if you do wish to do this you will need to re-enter your RAS log-on details.  Failure to respond will result in your session ending.

it’s important that you disconnect your RAS session when it’s not essential for you to be online.

The message will say ‘’You have now been logged on continuously for 2 hours, please consider working off-line for a period of time’ Please select ‘Extend’ to extend this session then enter your user-ID or email address.

I get a message saying no internet access on my laptop - What does this mean?

Hover over the alert against the Wi-Fi icon and the status displayed is ‘Wi-Fi device No Internet Access and SSA-Intra.net No Internet Access’. This is a security feature and does not prevent access to the network.

My laptop is asking for my Windows password to be reset what is the best way to do this?


  Press Ctrl-Alt-Del
  Select ‘Change Password’
  Enter your current password
  Enter your new password twice as instructed
  Confirm new password by clicking ‘Submit’
  BlackBerry password must also be updated


I cannot remember my Windows Password how do I get it reset?


  
      
  
  
    FastPass – How to Reset your Windows Password
    
        MS Word Document, 161 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


What do I do if I wipe the data from my Blackberry by forgetting my password?

Please refer to the intranet IT Portal, there is a self-help article for BlackBerry Device Rebuild or call the IT helpdesk on 019467 71180.

Can I download information onto a USB and take it home to use on my personal laptop/PC? If so, what is the maximum classification?

Yes – If you cannot access the NDA hub. The USB device must be provided by ISO and encrypted, the device must also be checked for malware and viruses (Sheep-Dipped) before plugging back into any Sellafield Ltd device.

All files must be deleted from the personal device once work has been completed. The maximum classification that can be taken home and stored on a personal device is OFFICIAL.

Can I print information and take it home? If so, what is the maximum classification?

Sellafield Ltd employees working on OFFICIAL and OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE: Allowed  - Please follow additional advice within documents ‘How do I manage information classified as OFFICIAL?’ and ‘How do I manage information marked OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE? which are referenced in the ‘Key policies to enable home working’ section above.

Supply Chain working on OFFICIAL: Allowed – Please follow additional advice within this document ‘How do I manage information classified as OFFICIAL?’ which is referenced in the ‘Key policies to enable home working’ section above.

Supply Chain working on OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE at home:  NOT Allowed - Information released to the supply chain requires assurances that the information is held securely. Work is ongoing to approve this on limited and approved supply chain corporate IT devices.

Can I use my printer at home? If so, what’s the maximum classification

No – users can’t connect Sellafield Ltd assets to personal assets; this increases the risk of introducing malware and viruses to our network. However, documents marked up to OFFICIAL can be emailed to a personal machine, which can then be used to print.

Please remember to follow the guidance regarding printing and handling of hard-copies found in the document “How do I manage information marked OFFICIAL.”

Can more than 1 person use a Sellafield laptop?

Up to 4 Sellafield employees in 1 household can use a Sellafield Laptop, however each employee must have a Remote Access (RSA token) of their own.  To activate this all users must have logged into the laptop using their token from a Sellafield location, not over remote access.  Albion Square 1 and Hinton House will remain open over the coming weeks to be able to do this.

Can I share a device with a partner or family member, to work remotely?

Yes – current Sellafeld Windows 7 and 10 devices can be shared.


  Windows 10 users will have to share their Bit-Locker password (the 1st password login) for the device to allowed shared use of 1 device, this has temporarily been accepted by the company.
  Users will need their own individual RSA token
  Users will need to log on to the shared device at work before using the RAS token to download a profile


Can I log into my OPMS from my partner or family member’s Sellafield Ltd account?

Yes, temporarily. We understand that those without remote access to the network may still need access to their OPMS account – we are temporarily allowing those in that situation to log into their OPMS account using a partner/family members SL account. You must log out of the OPMS account immediately after you have finished using it.

Can I send emails on behalf of the company from my personal account?

No – Sellafield Ltd and its employees must be transparent and accountable for their decisions, actions and communications; using personal email accounts runs counter to this intent and regulatory expectation. Its also likely that any recipient of such an email would query its validity.

Can I email information to my personal account? If so, what is the maximum classification?

Processing of OFFICIAL information (marked or unmarked) on personal devices should be avoided wherever possible. If this is not possible, employees are to adhere to the following:


  Ensure the device is running current and up to date anti-virus/security solutions, such as Windows Defender
  Sellafield data is not to be stored on any cloud service for example: Dropbox, GoogleDrive or Microsoft Office365
  Sellafield data is to be deleted from the machine as soon as practicable
  Where Sellafield data is emailed back into Sellafield, it should be deleted from email accounts as soon as practicable but not later than 48 hours after transmission.


Processing of personal data (e,g data about other members of employees) is not permitted on personal devices. Personal data of the user may be processed on the user’s machine at the user’s risk.

Can I send attachments to personal emails?

The newly approved NDA Hub fulfils this need, The NDA Hub is now open for use by any individual with a Sellafield Ltd network account, this is the most secure and preferred method of accessing and transmitting OFFICIAL (marked or unmarked) information on personal devices.

The use of personal email to exchange should be as a last resort, with emails being deleted from private email accounts no later than 48 hours after receipt.

Can I post work home?

OFFICIAL marked documents can be posted through a Sellafield Ltd colleague’s door so long as it is within a sealed envelope and the name of recipient is clearly marked on it.  The individual should also be given advance warning that the document is to be posted and should either be in the house at the time of posting or at least will be back at the house that day.

OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE information can be posted, it must be enveloped, clearly marked and the recipient a Sellafield Ltd employee. The recipient should be present and give confirmation of receipt at the time of posting, i.e. post the documents, knock on the door, stand back to maintain social distancing and confirm that the individual has received the document(s).

Can I physically post work through a colleague’s door?

OFFICIAL marked documents can be posted through a Sellafield Ltd’s colleague’s door so long as it is within a sealed envelope and the name of recipient is clearly marked there upon.

The individual should also be given advance warning that the document is to be posted and should either be in the house at the time of posting or at least will be back at the house that day.

OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE information should be enveloped, clearly marked (named individual) and can be posted. The recipient should be present and give confirmation of receipt at the time of posting, i.e. post the documents, knock on the door, stand back to maintain social distancing and confirm that the individual has received the document(s).

Storage and destruction of hard copy information

Hard copy information produced or brought home must be handled in line with our policies for the handling of OFFICIAL and OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE information, as it would within a work/office environment.

Storage of OFFICIAL hard copy information at home

For marked OFFICIAL information, the protection measures are as follows:


  domestic level of security will suffice
  store under lock and key where possible
  keep out of sight (I.e. from windows or from other people with access to the home)
  no processing of any personal data on non-Sellafield Ltd computer equipment
  do not leave in the home unattended for long periods of time (e.g. holidays)


Storage of OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE hard copy information at home

For marked OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE information, the protection measures are as follows:


  all the above controls for OFFICIAL
  must be stored under lock and key when not in use


Sellafield Ltd does not stipulate the make and manufacturer of storage devices; a lockable metal file or desk drawer is sufficient. Keys must be kept separate to the lock.

Destruction of OFFICIAL or OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE hard copy information at home

Hard copy information must be shredded at source, ideally cross-cut shredded, that is, the lines of text must be at right angles to the direction of the shredding.

If you have a home shredder that meets this specification, then OFFICIAL and OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE information may be shredded at home then disposed of with regular paper recycling.

Where there are bulk shredding requirements, or you do not have a shredder at home - the documents are to be kept securely (in lockable office furniture) until return-to-work, where they can be brought into the office for collection by an approved party.

Keeping in touch for wellbeing

Use any method or messaging system that is accessible by your team or colleagues to keep in touch for wellbeing and duty of care purposes. We ask that company information is only shared on the approved platforms using the prescribed methods above.

Phone calls

Landline and mobile phones (both personal and corporate) can be used for discussions up to and including OFFICIAL.

Messaging

The use of SMS/Text service (even on corporate mobile phones) is insecure, information of a sensitive or personal nature should not be transmitted by this means. In extreme situations, e.g. Nuclear emergency, Blackberry’s may be used to send OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE SMSs.

The use of internet messaging services (e.g. Hangouts, Viber, WhatsApp etc.) for processing or discussing OFFICIAL (Marked or Unmarked), OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE or personal data is not permitted.

However, those services are allowed to be used for welfare calls and check-in conversations with employees – as long as those chats are not used to discuss OFFICIAL/OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE business information, e.g. ongoing projects, contracts, work being undertaken etc.

Users should be aware that security and privacy controls are weak.

Video conference software (e.g. MS Teams/Zoom)

Sellafield Ltd employees can use Microsoft Teams for internal conferencing between Sellafield Ltd account holders, at OFFICIAL, on personal devices.

Microsoft Teams may be used inside an Sellafield Ltd office on a personal device; however, users must ensure that if they are using the video conferencing functionality that no OFFICIAL or above information is in the frame and that no one who is not participating in the call is visible. As a courtesy to other employees and to present our nuclear professionalism, calls should be made against a wall or in a meeting room.

There is currently no video conferencing software available for the discussion of OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE business information from corporate or personal machines with external parties.

It is envisaged that with further deployment of Microsoft Teams as a collaborative platform, wide scale video conferencing between Sellafield Ltd employees on corporate and personal machines at OFFICIAL, will become available.

Sellafield Ltd employees may now join third party Microsoft Teams calls using their Sellafield Ltd Microsoft Teams account on a personal device. Sellafield Ltd employees are not permitted to upload Sellafield Ltd documents from their personal laptop onto a third party Office365 environment.

Use of personal video conference capabilities on personal devices such as Zoom, Hangouts, Viber etc. is only appropriate for team catch ups and wellbeing conversations between colleagues and line managers. These should not be used for any business-related discussions and users should be aware that security and privacy controls are weak.

We also understand that using new technology and new systems takes some getting used to. The IT helpdesk is unable to provide guidance on how you can use Microsoft Teams or any access problems you might have, but there are lots of resources available online. including the video below.

Logging on to Sellafield Ltd’s Office 365 Environment

Social Media

All employees are reminded that the publishing of OFFICIAL (marked or unmarked) and above information is not permitted on any social media platform (e.g. Facebook, LinkedIn, Slack etc.).

E-Rooms
E-Rooms are no longer permitted to be used. Assessments have revealed many vulnerabilities in their infrastructure making them unsuitable for the processing of OFFICIAL Sellafield Ltd information. Instead, please utilise the NDA Hub or our Microsoft Teams environment for collaboration.

IT security advice - general information

Stolen devices

Our devices are more at risk of being stolen (or lost/damaged) when they are away from the office or home. Not only does this present an increased risk of data loss and compromise, but due to the current situation our service providers will struggle to repair or replace equipment. Please take extra care during this period.

Corporate Blackberries can be remotely locked or erased to prevent data loss. As always, please report any lost devices as soon as possible to the ATOS helpdesk and line management.

Make sure you know how to report any problems. This is especially important for security issues.

You might feel more exposed to cyber threats when working outside the office environment, so we’ve put together some top tips on how to secure your personal devices should you be called upon to use them for work.

VPNS

Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) create a network tunnel between you and another point on the internet. There are various free and paid for services that will provide features like anonymous web browsing.

If you use a VPN at home, you must not use it to process any Sellafield Ltd documents or communications. Often these services use various nodes around the world to route your traffic and achieve anonymity.

Given the data patriation rules for keeping all OFFICIAL content within the UK, VPNs should not be used unless accredited by the company.

Physical connections

Your device should only ever be recharged with trusted power adapters and cables.

Don’t physically connect corporate devices to any other without approval first, this includes USB, HDMI, Firewire etc.

SLSP 4.09.304 states that only Sellafield Ltd. approved devices can be connected to Sellafield Ltd assets.

Wireless devices such as wireless mice and keyboards are not permitted to be used with Sellafield Ltd laptops due to easily exploitable vulnerabilities. If you wanting to connect peripherals such as a keyboard and mouse to your machine, please ensure that they are wired devices and are from a reputable brand, e.g. HP.

Spotting email scams

Cyber criminals are preying on fears of the coronavirus and sending ‘phishing’ emails that try and trick users into clicking on a bad link.

Once clicked, the user is sent to a dodgy website which could download malware onto your computer or steal passwords. The scams may claim to have a ‘cure’ for the virus, offer a financial reward, or be encouraging you to donate.

Like many phishing scams, these emails are preying on real-world concerns to try and trick people into doing the wrong thing.

Please refer to our guidance on dealing with suspicious emails to learn more about spotting and dealing with phishing emails.

For genuine information about the virus, please use trusted resources such as the Public Health England or NHS websites.

If you have already clicked onto a suspicious email

The most important thing to do is not to panic. If you are on a corporate device follow the normal procedures, utilising the Spam Helpdesk and contacting the Atos Helpdesk. If you’re on a personal device there are number of practical steps, you can take as well as reporting the incident to us:

Open your antivirus (AV) software and run a full scan. Follow any instructions given. If you’ve been tricked into providing your password, you should change your passwords on all your other accounts.

If you have lost money, you need to report it as a crime to Action Fraud UK.

If things go wrong

When something goes wrong, or you suspect your device or its data may be compromised, it is important to take action promptly.

If you have any reason to suspect that someone else knows your password then it must be changed immediately -either on the device itself or via the Atos Helpdesk.

The same goes if you forget your password please contact via the Atos Helpdesk.

If you are experiencing problems with the device, you must never give your device to anyone else (e.g. a commercial repairer or IT savvy family member) to try to fix; always contact the ATOS helpdesk.

If you think someone may have tampered with your device (such as accessing the inside of it, or removing / replacing parts of it), stop using it immediately, turn it off, and contact us for assistance.

Data Protection

During these unprecedented times, there will undoubtedly be a need to share or use data relating to our employees and our wider community.

The need to act or react quickly may require teams or individuals to collect and use this data in haste. Whilst there is without doubt a valid and genuinely pressing reason, Data Protection Law must be considered in all cases.

For any advice or guidance relating to the use or collection of personal data please do not hesitate to contact the Data Protection Officer data.protection.team@sellafieldsites.com.

Atos remote fixes

When Atos are required to implement fixes remotely onto individuals’ laptops, the use of an ethernet cable is sometimes required. The use of an ethernet cable to connect a Sellafield Ltd laptop to a home router is not allowed, so permission from Cyber Security is required before the fix can be implemented.

To gain permission for the use of ethernet cable, the individual’s line manager must email the following information to Cyber.Security@Sellafieldsites.com:


  the precise time and date that the ethernet connection will be in place
  length of time that the laptop will be connected via ethernet cable
  how long the individual has had an RSA token/ remote access to the network
  the business justification and priority for the fix being applied
  the laptop asset number
  ATOS request number


Cyber Security will then decide whether a cabled connection will be allowed and offer relevant advice to the individual.

Working abroad

For requests to take Sellafield Ltd IT (Laptops) abroad, an email must be sent to Information.Risk@Sellafieldsites.com.

The email should contain the details of request e.g. country/duration/access arrangements/storage information, the Asset ID and confirmation of line manager’s approval.

There should also be a robust business justification as to why you require the Sellafield Ltd assets abroad.

Requests to take a Blackberry abroad can be done via Service Now under “Enable blackberry for business use abroad”.

The NDA Hub can be accessed abroad on a personal device however, information must not be downloaded onto a personal device for printing.

MS Teams cannot be accessed abroad.

Hard copy information is not to be taken abroad.

My Contribution - Making Connections Count

Checking in with our people and teams about their wellbeing and day-to-day work expectations is now more important than ever.

To help support you with this, the My Contribution Team is sharing the first of its performance “nudges” to give you some extra guidance, regardless of whether you or your team are working remotely.

“Making Connections Count” is about having the right conversations and has suggested prompts for line managers; shows the value of staying connected and a story from one of our own managers.

To see the details go to any of the following:

·       The My Contribution SharePoint page

·       The Virtual Learning Environment
 (does not require network access). If you already have an account, use your existing log in details and scroll down the page and select the My Contribution area.

If you don’t have an account, use the generic log on details:

Username: guest.user
Password: Password123@

Both of these My Contribution pages have all the tools and information to help you have the right conversations and recognise the contribution that each individual makes. In addition, they also have:


  New editable tools so you or your team can capture performance data prior to the launch of the My Contribution system
  Making Connections Count guidance
  Links to supporting materials, including manager toolkits and Ted Talks (Virtual Learning Environment only)


In the meantime, we need to maintain our focus on performance management. Here’s a checklist you can use to help your team continue to focus on their contribution:


  
    Continue to hold regular telephone and virtual check-in conversations with your team members, with a focus on wellbeing, objectives/goals and behaviours
  
  
    Use the My Contribution Check-in tool (below) to support you with regular conversations (editable versions are available vis the SharePoint page or the Virtual Learning Environment)
  



  
      
  
  
    Check in Conversation Tool 
    
        PDF, 98.4 KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  Using the individual and team goal setting tools(below), agree objectives and goals which can be input into the My Contribution system at a later date. Discussions should focus on the flow down of objectives where appropriate, work currently being undertaken and what can reasonably be achieved and/or other aspects pertinent to the individual’s current situation during Covid-19.



  
      
  
  
    Individual Objective Setting Tool 
    
        PDF, 96.9 KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  
      
  
  
    Team Goal Setting Tool
    
        PDF, 96.5 KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@sellafieldsites.com.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  
    Record performance data where appropriate so you can add it to the IT system when normal business activity resumes
  
  
    Remember, there is no requirement to populate a 2020/21 PMA form in OPMS at this time
  


If you have any questions, please email my.contribution@sellafieldsites.com

Employee support - Welfare and wellbeing

During these unprecedented and difficult times weare keen to ensure friends, colleagues and employees are aware of the ongoing support available.

The support that we would usually offer our colleagues when they are going through a difficult period such as bereavement, grief and other family issues remains the same; albeit we may need to access it or arrange for it in a different manner.

The coronavirus pandemic has led to lots of changes to how we live our lives. These changes take time to adapt to.

It is hard to provide guidance for all employees on the best way to work from home – some people will benefit from the routine and structure of the working day, whereas others will prefer working at quieter times or where there are less distractions. The important thing is that people find a way of working that is right for them and ensures they’re able to do what they need to.

With lots of our employees now working from home, it’s more difficult to access some of our usual welfare and wellbeing services. This includes our network of mental health champions, who might not be available or might be dealing with unusual circumstances of their own.

Line managers should check in with their employees (home working or otherwise) regularly.

There are lots of other useful sources of information. We have listed some of these below:

Mental health charities

Rethink Mental Health has set up an online hub filled with practical support and information for people living with or supporting people with mental illness

The Mental Health Foundation have a similar site as well as Mind.

BBC News

The BBC coronavirus pages don’t just contain the latest news. They also have a lot of help and guidance. The BBC also have their own mental health guidance pages.

NHS

The NHS website is the place to go for all official government health advice, including relating to mental health and responding to coronavirus.

Sellafield EDI Hub

Employees who have access to the Sellafield Ltd IT network can access our EDI hub.

This contains a lot of information, advice and guidance on a range of subjects including coronavirus and mental health.

Employee assistance programme

We have an employee assistance programme provided by Aviva and Care First.

The service is available 24 hours a day, every day.

To access the service:


  Call 0800 015 5630
  Download the Thrive:Mental Wellbeing app (to access the app, use  your own email address , work or personal, and use the code NDA0001).
  Visit www.eap-carefirst.com using the login details:
    
      Username: lifestyle1234
      Password: carefirst
    
  


Calls are confidential unless Care First believe there is a risk of serious harm to yourself or anyone else.

The employee assistance programme is not only there for employees requiring emotional support for illnesses and crisis, such as mental health problems or bereavements. They also provide advice and support on life events and issues such as moving house, managing money and retirement.

Like the service provided to CIC, our employee assistance programme is available to current Sellafield Ltd employees, apprentices and graduates, those who have recently retired, and family members of Sellafield Ltd employees.

It is also available to new starters who have received an offer letter but have not yet started their employment.

Enhanced Employee Assistance Programme app now available



To ensure our employees are supported during these challenging times, we have introduced some additional Employee Assistance Programme resources.

All employees can now download and use the Thrive: Mental Wellbeing app.

The app is NHS approved and is designed not only to help you manage common mental health conditions but also to detect the early signs and often prevent them from happening in the first place. So, help is always there when you need it.

It includes advice, articles and webinars on a range of everyday topics, direct access to counselling and subject matter experts and specialists.

To access the app, simply search for it on your usual phone app store. You’ll need to enter your email address and select a password. You’ll then need our access code, NDA0001. As you’ll need to verify your email address, please ensure you use one which you have access to.

The app is operated by Aviva who provide the NDA Group Employee Assistance Programme.

Sellafield employees, including apprentices and even those who are recently retired can continue to access our own programme.

Mental Health Champions

Mental Health Champions are a point of contact for an employee who is experiencing a mental health issue or emotional distress, helping the person get appropriate help, and also provide early intervention for someone who may be developing a mental health issue.

During this challenging time, there are still Mental Health Champions who have access to their work emails and phone number, and can be reached through the usual route (EDI Hub).

For those of you who have access to the NDA estate-wide The Hub, the Mental Health Champions are setting up a group there to facilitate communication and support.

Preventing suicide

Speak to your own GP or to the Sellafield Occupational Health service, if you have mental health problems or are having suicidal thoughts.

There is the NHS webpages on suicide and having suicidal thoughts. These cover what you should do if you are having suicidal thoughts yourself, as well as if you are worried about someone else.

In Cumbria:


  Every Life Matters
  Samaritans West Cumbria


In Warrington:


  
Papyrus (prevention of young suicide) – based in Warrington, but available nationally for support
  Samaritans Warrington


Wellbeing app

Employees with a Sellafield Blackberry device can access also access the wellbeing app.

Family network

The Sellafield family network is a voluntary group of Sellafield employees which works to support families.

The group can provide peer-to-peer support and signpost people to other routes for advice and guidance on issues they might face.

If you would like to join the network – to speak to colleagues – or because you’d like to discuss an issue the network might be able to support you with, then please email family.network@sellafieldsites.com.

Employees with network access can access more information on the EDI hub, available from the company intranet.

Every Life Matters

Every Life Matters has produced a guide to looking after yourselves and others during COVID-19.

Domestic Abuse

In an emergency, contact the police on 999.

If you are in danger but can’t speak:


  dial 999
  listen to the questions from the 999 operator
  respond by coughing or tapping the handset if you can
  If prompted, press 55
  this lets the 999 call operator know it’s a genuine emergency and you’ll be put through to the police


Other sources of help:

The Freedom Project

The Freedom Project helpline (West Cumbria): Tel: 07712 117986

Calls to this number may appear on your phone bill so ensure it is safe to call and that calling will not put you in danger now or in the future. Please consider calling from a friend’s phone, with their permission.

National Domestic Violence

National Domestic Violence Helpline: Tel: 0808 2000 247 (24-hour free phone service for women provided by Refuge and Women’s Aid).

Safety Net

Safety Net is a specialist organisation that supports the recovery of those affected by rape, exploitation, domestic and sexual abuse in Cumbria.

Their specialist trauma-informed support team and therapists aim to improve emotional resilience by improving self-care and coping strategies, strengthening relationships and encouraging social engagement.

Springfield

Springfield provide domestic abuse support services in South Lakeland.

Staff at Springfield are trained in all aspects of the support needed, including understanding mental health, drug and alcohol issues, the dynamics and effects of domestic abuse, suicide prevention, the benefits system, assessing and managing risk, and support planning.

Sources of help In the Warrington area

These include:

Survive

Survive who offer one to one time-unlimited counselling to adult (over 14) survivors of abuse including sexual, physical, mental and financial. They also run a weekly survivors support group every Thursday 6:00pm to 8:00pm.

Cheshire East Domestic Abuse Hub

Cheshire East Domestic Abuse Hub is a single point of contact, information, consultation, referral, triage and case allocation for families affected by domestic abuse and those who support them - formally or informally.

Warrington Women’s Aid

Warrington Women’s Aid is a charity supporting adults and children experiencing domestic abuse.

Respect Men’s Advice

Respect Men’s Advice Tel: 0808 8010327

A webchat is on a Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 10:00am to 11:00am and 3:00pm to 4:00pm.

Email: info@mensadviceline.org.uk or visit their website Mens Advice Line.

We aim to make our service accessible to everyone. Calls to 0808 80 numbers are free to call from landlines and mobile phones within the UK and do not appear on itemised bills. They are also free to call from BT payphones.

If English isn’t your first language you can ask for a telephone interpreter or ask someone you know to do it for you.

Our Helpline Advisors are trained to communicate with those unable to hear or speak on the phone via the Next Generation Text Service facility

Sellafield Ltd Domestic Abuse Contact Network

For more information on the network, the contacts and their role, please contact one of the network co-chairs:

In West Cumbria:


  
    
      Hannah Z Bell
      hannah.z.bell@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Richard Johnstone
      richard.johnstone@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Kelly Farmer
      
Kelly.farmer@sellafieldsites.com (currently on maternity leave)
    
  


In Warrington:


  
    
      Elizabeth Kinghorn
      Elizabeth.kinghorn@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Caroline Illidge
      caroline.illidge@sellafieldsites.com
    
  


Sellafield Ltd domestic abuse contacts during COVID-19


  
    
      Name
      Email log on ID
      Email address
    
  
  
    
      Mark Smyth
      ms253
      mark.smyth@sellafielsites.com
    
    
      Amanda Hoyle
      ajc21
      amanda.j.hoyle@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Sarah Cooper
      sh227
      sarah.cooper@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Stephen Milton
      sm119
      stephen.milton@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Joyce Barnes
      jb369
      joyce.barnes@sellafieldsites.com
    
    
      Claire Tandy
      ct89
      claire.tandy@sellafielsdsites.com
    
  


Warrington offices

Working in our Warrington office

Our Warrington office have their own risk assessments which are aligned to and expand on the Enterprise Risk Assessment.

To ensure you understand exactly what will be expected of you, before attending our Warrington office please ensure you have read and understood the following documents:

Risk assessment, Hinton House

Hinton House COVID-19 Risk Assessment  (MS Word Document, 252 KB)

Working arrangements – Hinton House

Hinton House working arrangements brief (MS Word Document, 334 KB)

Hinton House map



Where to find the latest information

Nationally


  government coronavirus (COVID-19) - guidance

  health information and advice - NHS



Sellafield Ltd


  GOV.UK external website - staff update

  Sellafield Ltd Facebook - page

  Sellafield Ltd Twitter - page






      
        
    Published 25 March 2020
    Last updated 16 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 December 2021
              Revised working arrangements for Hinton House.
            
            
              28 October 2021
              Updated risk assessment - Warrington offices
            
            
              5 October 2021
              Updated Hinton House working arrangements
            
            
              10 September 2021
              Updated working arrangements and enterprise risk assessment
            
            
              19 August 2021
              Updated Hinton House risk assessment and working arrangements
            
            
              23 July 2021
              Warrington Offices new risk assessment and working arrangements
            
            
              2 June 2021
              Updated - Hinton House COVID-19 Risk Assessment - issue 15
            
            
              7 May 2021
              Hinton House working arrangements update
            
            
              31 March 2021
              Clinically Extremely Vulnerable people – updated guidance
            
            
              29 March 2021
              Update working arrangements for the Warrington office
            
            
              12 March 2021
              Updated working arrangements and risk assessment for Hinton House
            
            
              12 February 2021
              Health and Safety working arrangements update
            
            
              9 February 2021
              Updated risk assessments for Allday and Hinton House, Warrington.
            
            
              5 February 2021
              Change in the mental health champion list.
            
            
              28 January 2021
              Updated working arrangements for Hinton and Allday House, Warrington offices
            
            
              21 January 2021
              Updated working arrangements for Allday and Hinton House, Warrington
            
            
              15 January 2021
              Updated risk assessments for Hinton and Allday House - Warrington
            
            
              17 December 2020
              Returning to work in the new year guidance
            
            
              8 December 2020
              Updated Allday and Hinton House working arrangements
            
            
              24 November 2020
              Updated working arrangements for Hinton and Allday House in Warrington
            
            
              4 November 2020
              Employee assistance programme information updated
            
            
              26 October 2020
              Updated Hinton House working arrangements
            
            
              16 October 2020
              Updated Risk Assessments
            
            
              7 September 2020
              Updated Pay Policy V7
            
            
              3 September 2020
              Return to workplace update - Version 5
            
            
              21 August 2020
              Updated risk assessments for Hinton House and Allday House in Warrington
            
            
              17 August 2020
              Hinton and Allday House restart brief update
            
            
              12 August 2020
              Return to work document
            
            
              27 July 2020
              Updated remote working guidance and IT FAQs
            
            
              24 July 2020
              I would like to have a test for reassurance update.
            
            
              16 July 2020
              Updated return to work pack V3
            
            
              9 July 2020
              Updated Risk Assessments for Warrington Offices
            
            
              7 July 2020
              Updated Risk Assessments for Allday House and Hinton
            
            
              24 June 2020
              Returning to Work update
            
            
              15 June 2020
              Updated pay policy and procedures, FAQs and advice for the extremely vulnerable
            
            
              10 June 2020
              Warrington office update
            
            
              9 June 2020
              Update on IT support and guidance FAQs/Warrington Offices Risk Assessments
            
            
              5 June 2020
              Information about personal items and tech at our Warrington offices added
            
            
              4 June 2020
              Timebooking reminder
            
            
              21 May 2020
              Mental Health Champions contact details update
            
            
              12 May 2020
              Updated Health and Safety Working Arrangements at Hinton and Allday House during COVID-19 pandemic for stage 3 key workers.
            
            
              7 May 2020
              'Supporting your return to work' section added.
            
            
              30 April 2020
              Information for those asked to attend work in Warrington offices
            
            
              28 April 2020
              HR Policy update
            
            
              28 April 2020
              Additional information on domestic abuse contacts added to the Wellbeing and Welfare section.
            
            
              22 April 2020
              Sellafield Ltd domestic abuse contacts added during Covid-19
            
            
              9 April 2020
              Volunteering FAQs added to the document
            
            
              9 April 2020
              Collaborating at home document and updated IT FAQS added
            
            
              6 April 2020
              Additonal 'My Contribution' section added
            
            
              6 April 2020
              Access information for Hinton House amended.
            
            
              2 April 2020
              Updated IT support FAQs and pay policy procedures
            
            
              31 March 2020
              Volunteering to support our community section added.
            
            
              31 March 2020
              Welfare and wellbeing update.
            
            
              25 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Restarting more work - Sellafield Ltd

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    