
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Programme delivery manager
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what a programme delivery manager does and the skills you need to do the job.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of programme delivery manager

        
        
          Programme delivery manager

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This describes the role of a programme delivery manager and the skills required, including:


  an introduction to the role, telling you what you would do in this role and the full list of skills
  a description of the specific role, specifying the skills you need and the corresponding skill level (awareness, working, practitioner, expert)


This role is part of the Digital, Data and Technology Profession in the Civil Service.

Introduction to the role of programme delivery manager

A programme delivery manager is accountable for the delivery of complex products and services that are being delivered by multiple teams or have high technical or political risk.

Skills required to be a programme delivery manager

You will need the following skills for this role, although the level of expertise for each will vary, depending on the role level.


  
Agile and Lean practices. You know about and can lead on a range of Agile and Lean tools and techniques, with an ability to coach within and outside of your team. You can represent and be an advocate for these tools and techniques. You are innovative and ensure that you are up-to-date with the latest trends. You can establish a feedback loop for teams. You can take responsibility for the translation and measurement of value (what you put in and what you will get out) and ensure this relates to practical government objectives and the user needs. You can ensure the team has a situational awareness of work and priorities across the team. You can ensure that working practices are iterated to achieve effective delivery.
  
Commercial management. You can support effective budget management within the constraints of the project. You know how to monitor projected budgets against expenditure.
  
Communication skills. You know how to communicate effectively across organisational, technical and political boundaries, understanding the context. You can advocate and communicate what a team does to create trust and authenticity. You know how to successfully react and respond to challenge.
  
Community collaboration. You can contribute to the work of the community, building successful teams through understanding team styles and influencing as well as motivating team members. You know how to give and receive constructive feedback, facilitating the feedback loop. You can facilitate conflict resolution within teams, ensure the team is transparent and that the work is understood externally. You can help teams maintain a focus on delivery while being aware of the importance of professional development.
  
Financial management. You can support effective budget management within the constraints of the project. You know how to monitor budget spend against expenditure.
  
Life-cycle perspective. You understand the different phases of product delivery and can contribute to, plan or run these. You can maintain a product or process through the delivery phases, into live and then into retirement. You know how to lead a team through the different phases of the delivery product life cycle. You can maintain and iterate a product over time to continuously meet user needs. You understand incident management and service support so that products are built effectively.
  
Maintaining delivery momentum. You know how to solve issues and unblock problems. You can drive teams and set the pace, ensuring teams are working towards delivery commitments. You know how to engage in elements of risk management, such as effectively managing and tracking the mitigation of risks. You can manage various dependencies across teams, departments and government as a whole.
  
Making the process work. You focus on the outcome. You can challenge and improve disproportionate organisational processes where it impacts the pace of the team. You can identify what works best for the team and when to utilise certain processes. You understand that all steps in a process must add value. You can influence and make positive changes to the organisation.
  
Planning. You can take a consistent and ongoing approach to planning, forecasting, estimating, managing uncertainty, metrics and measurements, contingency planning and roadmapping. You know how to communicate plans, planning assumptions and progress to a range of stakeholders. You can maintain the cadence of delivery and manage the relationships between different people within and across teams.


Programme delivery manager

A programme delivery manager is accountable for the delivery of complex products and services that are delivered by multiple teams or have high technical or political risk. In this role, you will:


  manage dependencies of varying complexity, potentially planning and feeding into larger programmes and portfolios
  remove blockers and manage risks, commercials, budgets and people
  balance objectives and can redeploy people and resources as priorities change
  have an indepth knowledge of Agile and other methodologies
  be responsible for understanding, managing and communicating to complex stakeholder groups, balancing priorities
  be the initial escalation point for the programme and must have an awareness of the bigger picture


Programme delivery managers support the programme director by overseeing the delivery of their vision for the programme. They support and coach delivery managers.

Skills needed for this role


  
Agile and Lean practices. You know how to coach and lead teams in Agile and Lean practices. You are a recognised expert that advocates these approaches, continuously reflecting and challenging the team. You can create or tailor new ways of working; you are always innovating. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Commercial management. You can act as the escalation point and resolve large or high-risk commercial management issues. You know how to coach others in appropriate commercial management. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Communication skills. You can mediate between people and mend relationships, communicating with stakeholders at all levels. You can manage stakeholder expectations and facilitate discussions about high risk and complexity even within constrained timescales. . You can speak and represent the community to large audiences inside and outside of government. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Community collaboration. You know how to solve and unblock issues between teams or departments at the highest level. You understand the psychology of the team and have strong mediation skills. You can coach the organisation on team dynamics and conflict resolution while also building and growing the community. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Financial management. You know how to influence or create budgets that are complex (this could be across an organisation, programme or product view). You can manage the budget you are given and make it work. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Life-cycle perspective. You know how to successfully lead teams through the full product life cycle. You can identify which tools and techniques should be used at each stage. You can develop sustainable support models. You can identify and deal with potential risks across or between all stages of the product life cycle. You know how to coach others. You can contribute to the assessment of other teams, providing guidance and support as they move through stages of the product life cycle. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Maintaining delivery momentum. You know how to optimise the delivery flow of teams. You actively address the most complicated risks, issues and dependencies including where ownership exists outside the team or no clear ownership exists. You can identify innovative ways to unblock issues. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Making a process work. You can identify and challenge organisational processes of increasing complexity and those processes that are unnecessarily complicated. You can add value and can coach the organisation to inspect and adapt processes. You know how to guide teams through the implementation of a new process. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Planning. You know how to lead a continual planning process in a very complex environment. You can plan beyond product delivery. You can identify dependencies in plans across services and coordinate delivery. You know how to coach other teams as the central point of expertise. (Relevant skill level: expert)


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs
  Read about the government’s agile delivery community
  Read about agile delivery in government





      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Interaction designer
        Software developer
        Performance analyst
        Test engineer
        Technical architect

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    