


2019 West Coast Aerospace Forum
An Air and Space Force Designed for the Future
by Susanna Blume, Kerry Buckley, William E. Chase III, Clinton E. Crosier, David A. Deptula, Preston Dunlap, Morgan Dwyer, Timothy G. Fay, Brian M. Killough, Todd Harrison, et al.
Related Topics: Military Strategy, Space Science and Technology, Space Warfare, United States Air Force, United States Space Force
Citation

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn








To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video


Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn
Embed



Add to website or blog
<iframe src="https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CF418/_jcr_content/par/product/par-research-brief/multimedialist/multimediavideoitem.embed" width="400" height="225" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
Copy and paste the selected text
RAND Project AIR FORCE joined the Aerospace Corporation, the Center for Strategic and International Studies, the Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, and the MITRE Corporation in sponsoring the fifth annual West Coast Aerospace Forum on December 6th, 2019. The forum provided a rare chance to engage with some of the Air Force's most senior and experienced leaders as well as top civilian national security experts in a setting that encouraged debate, discussion, and audience interaction. The theme of the 2019 event was "An Air and Space Force Designed for the Future."

Content





1:01:00



Air and Space Power in an Era Defined by Peer Competition
Dec 6, 2019
Ted Harshberger, David A. Deptula, David J. Kumashiro, Brian M. Killough, David N. Miller, Jr.





1:07:18



Service Perspective on Joint All Domain Command and Control
Dec 6, 2019
Kerry Buckley, Eric J. Wesley, John F. Meier, Preston Dunlap, David J. Kumashiro





1:03:28



How to Create a Successful Space Service
Dec 6, 2019
Jamie Morin, Margaux Hoar, Clinton E. Crosier, David D. Thompson, John F. Thompson





57:30



Projecting Power in an Increasingly Contested Environment
Dec 6, 2019
Susanna Blume, Heather Penney, Morgan Dwyer, David Ochmanek





1:13:27



Nuclear Forces and 21st Century Strategic Deterrence
Dec 6, 2019
Ted Harshberger, Timothy M. Ray, Christine Wormuth




Research conducted by

RAND Project AIR FORCE



This report is part of the RAND Corporation Conference proceeding series. RAND conference proceedings present a collection of papers delivered at a conference or a summary of the conference.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/CF418
Document Number: CF-418-AF
Year: 2020
Series: Conference Proceedings



Explore
Related Topics

Military StrategySpace Science and TechnologySpace WarfareUnited States Air ForceUnited States Space Force

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Blume, Susanna, Kerry Buckley, William E. Chase III, Clinton E. Crosier, David A. Deptula, Preston Dunlap, Morgan Dwyer, Timothy G. Fay, Brian M. Killough, Todd Harrison, Edward R. Harshberger, Margaux Hoar, David J. Kumashiro, John F. Meier, David N. Miller, Jr., Jamie Morin, David Ochmanek, Heather Penney, Timothy M. Ray, David D. Thompson, John F. Thompson, Eric J. Wesley, and Christine Wormuth, 2019 West Coast Aerospace Forum: An Air and Space Force Designed for the Future. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CF418.html.
Blume, Susanna, Kerry Buckley, William E. Chase III, Clinton E. Crosier, David A. Deptula, Preston Dunlap, Morgan Dwyer, Timothy G. Fay, Brian M. Killough, Todd Harrison, Edward R. Harshberger, Margaux Hoar, David J. Kumashiro, John F. Meier, David N. Miller, Jr., Jamie Morin, David Ochmanek, Heather Penney, Timothy M. Ray, David D. Thompson, John F. Thompson, Eric J. Wesley, and Christine Wormuth, 2019 West Coast Aerospace Forum: An Air and Space Force Designed for the Future, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, CF-418-AF, 2020. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CF418.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



