
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Competition: Autonomy in Challenging Environments Phase 2
  

  
  

  
    
  The Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) is seeking proposals to improve the capability of autonomous systems in challenging environments.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      30 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        21 July 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition Document: Autonomy in Challenging Environments Phase 2
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: Autonomy in Challenging Environments Phase 2
    
        MS Word Document, 90.9KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: Autonomy in Challenging Environments Phase 2
    
        MS Word Document, 50.3KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) is launching the second phase of the Autonomy in Challenging Environments theme, seeking proposals for novel and innovative technologies to improve the capability of unmanned autonomous military systems in challenging environments.

Unmanned autonomous and semi-autonomous systems are driving a revolutionary change in society and in the military.  These autonomous technologies have potential applications across many capability areas, and are expected to be increasingly deployed for military applications.  However, future conflicts are anticipated to take place in ever more challenging environments where these unmanned systems will be required to continue operating effectively and efficiently.

Funding of up to £2 million is available to fund multiple projects over this second (and last) phase, with up to £400K available for individual proposals.

Full details are available in the competition document.

The competition closes on Thursday 10 September 2020 at midday (BST).

Queries should be sent to accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 30 June 2020
    Last updated 21 July 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              21 July 2020
              One to one appointments are now available to be booked - see competition document for link.
            
            
              30 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    