
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    ETL product types: compressed air equipment
  

  
  

  
    
  Product descriptions for equipment eligible for the Energy Technology List, explaining the requirements for components of compressed air systems.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      1 February 2014
      Last updated
      
        20 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    ETL760 Compressed Air Equipment
    
        
          Ref: ETL760
        
        PDF, 400KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This leaflet sets out the requirements for inclusion in the list, and the benefits of purchase, for:


  master controllers
  refrigerated air dryers
  desiccant air dryers


See the Energy Technology Product List for the eligible products in this category, listed by brand name.

See the Energy Technology Criteria List.



        
      

      
    Published 1 February 2014
    Last updated 20 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 April 2020
              On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the ECA and First Year Tax Credits Scheme (FYTC) will end from April 2020 for products on the ETL. This ETL publication has been updated to remove references to the ECA.
Flow controllers are no longer included in the ETL.
            
            
              20 September 2018
              Updated to reflect changes to the product categories on the Energy Technology List
            
            
              1 February 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        ETL product types: heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment
        ETL product types: uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
        ETL product types: pipework insulation equipment
        ETL product types: motors and drives
        ETL product types: high speed hand air dryers

  




      

    Collection

  


        Energy Technology List (ETL): product types

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy
        Energy demand reduction

  


  

  


    
  


    