
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Initial teacher education (ITE) inspection framework and handbook
  

  
  

  
    
  This framework and handbook document sets out Ofsted’s inspection principles, guidance and the main judgements that inspectors make when inspecting ITE. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ofsted

      
      Published
      24 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        15 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Initial teacher education (ITE) inspection framework and handbook
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Summary of changes: ITE inspection framework and handbook
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The first part of the document is the ITE inspection framework, which sets out how Ofsted will inspect ITE partnerships and make judgements about the different phases of ITE training.

The second part of the document is the inspection handbook. This is primarily a guide for Ofsted inspectors on how to carry out inspections of ITE in England from September 2020.

We also publish this for ITE partnerships and other interested parties so that they are aware of Ofsted’s inspection processes and procedures under the ITE framework.

We ran a consultation on the framework and draft handbook between January and April 2020.




        
      

      
    Published 24 June 2020
    Last updated 15 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              15 December 2021
              See 'Summary of changes' for details of the updates.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              Added a new section: ‘Inspection during the COVID-19 pandemic’ and minor edits. See summary of changes for more information.
            
            
              7 December 2020
              Added a note confirming that Ofsted will carry out full graded ITE inspections from April 2021.
            
            
              24 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Initial teacher education curriculum research
        Ofsted's inspections of initial teacher education providers
        Initial teacher training (ITT): accreditation
        HMCI commentary: the initial teacher education curriculum

  




      

    Collection

  


        Ofsted's inspections of initial teacher education providers
        Ofsted's plans: 2021

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Initial Teacher Training (ITT)

  


  

  


    
  


    