
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Assessment only route to QTS: criteria and supporting advice
  

  
  

  
    
  Criteria and supporting advice for accredited providers wishing to offer the assessment only route to qualified teacher status (QTS).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      8 August 2013
      Last updated
      
        1 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Assessment only route to QTS: criteria and supporting advice
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The assessment only route to qualified teacher status (QTS) allows teachers to demonstrate that they already meet all the QTS standards, without the need for any further training. Teachers need to present detailed evidence and their teaching is assessed in a school by an accredited and approved provider.

This guidance from the Department for Education (DfE) is for:


  accredited initial teacher training (ITT) providers and their partner schools
  Ofsted


Contact us


    Initial teacher training (ITT) accreditation


    
        
          Email itt.accreditation@education.gov.uk
        


    

    This email address is for potential new and accredited ITT providers. If you’re a potential candidate, wishing to gain qualified teacher status (QTS), please visit https://getintoteaching.education.gov.uk/explore-my-options/teacher-training-routes/specialist-training-options.






        
      

      
    Published 8 August 2013
    Last updated 1 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 September 2021
              Updated to revert to pre-COVID-19 advice.
            
            
              22 January 2021
              Removed references to being prohibited to teach in another country of the European Economic Area (EEA) and the Teacher Services System. Added links to Changes to checks for EU sanctions on EEA teachers and Recruit teachers from overseas.
            
            
              22 May 2020
              We have updated the ‘candidate assessment’ advice to explain what should happen when candidates’ progress on the Assessment Only (AO) route to QTS is interrupted as a consequence of the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.
            
            
              3 October 2019
              Changes to reflect the change in rules on skills tests.
            
            
              12 October 2018
              Updated criteria and supporting advice.
            
            
              7 September 2016
              Updated assessment only criteria supporting advice document
            
            
              7 March 2016
              Updated supporting advice.
            
            
              7 January 2016
              Updated assessment only criteria and supporting advice.
            
            
              15 July 2015
              Updated contact information
            
            
              8 August 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Initial teacher training core content framework for iQTS
        Qualified teacher status (QTS)
        International qualified teacher status: criteria for providers
        International qualified teacher status Teachers’ Standards

  




      

    Collection

  


        Qualified teacher status (QTS)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Qualified Teacher Status (QTS)

  


  

  


    
  


    