







A Truth Serum for Your Personal Perspective on Facial Recognition Software in Law Enforcement
Published in: Translational Criminology Magazine, Issue 21, pages 2–5 (Fall 2021) Posted on RAND.org on November 10, 2021
by Cynthia Diane Rudin, Shawn D. Bushway
Related Topics: Data Privacy, Emerging Technologies, Law Enforcement

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at cebcp.orgThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








A great deal has been written on the negative effects of facial recognition on society. We've seen IBM, Amazon, and other companies place a moratorium on facial recognition development. We've also seen wrongful arrests of Black people in the US and persecution of the Uighurs in China as a result of this technology. Many people have already decided whether they think facial recognition technology development should be banned. But facial recognition technology is much more complex when considering the latest science and empirical evidence of this technology.

Access further information on this document at cebcp.orgThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

RAND Social and Economic Well-Being



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Center for Evidence-Based Crime Policy
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 4
Document Number: EP-68760
Year: 2021
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Data PrivacyEmerging TechnologiesLaw Enforcement

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




