
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus support for business from outside government
  

  
  
  
      
  Public bodies, organisations and charities have produced additional resources that may be useful to employers and employees.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      3 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        16 July 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
These resources include a variety of information to help both employers and employees manage through coronavirus (COVID-19) crisis.

Advice for employers and employees

Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS)

Coronavirus (COVID-19) advice for employers and employees

ACAS are running webinars to outline practical measures and details of government support and available resources for employers.

Register for your free webinar place.

You can also register to watch the latest recorded coronavirus webinar.

Be the Business

Clear explanations of government and private support available for businesses

Practical guidance to help your business adapt to different ways of working

Advice from business leaders and other SMEs on how they are continuing to trade and succeed in difficult circumstances

Coronavirus questions and answers

Best of the web summaries

Business in the Community (BITC)

Business to businesses support

Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM)

Guidance and advice on marketing on the CIM content hub ‘Exchange’

Chartered Institute of Public Relations (CIPR)

Information support and advice

Tips for communicating with employees at times of crisis (PDF, 99KB, 1 page)

Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD)

How employers should respond to coronavirus

You can also sign-up for CIPD’s free coronavirus related webinars.

Companies House

Guidance for Companies House customers, employees and suppliers

Enterprise Nation

Businesses can receive free expert advice on a one-to-one basis from professional and trade body members to help support recovery from COVID-19. The advice covers a range of topics including HR, legal, finance and marketing which will be specific to your business.

The scheme is supported by the government and hosted by Enterprise Nation.

Access the free advice scheme on Enterprise Nation’s website

Financial Reporting Council

Advice to companies and auditors on coronavirus risk disclosures (PDF, 68KB, 1 page)

Future Learn

Tackling the novel coronavirus

LinkedIn

Staying informed and connected: resources to help navigate work and coronavirus

Made Smarter

Guidance on how technology can help manufacturing continuity

Mental Health at Work

Mental Health at Work: coronavirus toolkit

Mental Health at Work and FSB: small businesses and the self-employed - taking care during the pandemic

Mind

Coronavirus and your wellbeing

National Federation of Self Employed & Small Businesses (FSB)

Advice and guidance for small businesses and the self-employed

Pay it Forward campaign

Help for businesses in the hospitality, entertainment and sports industries to generate advance sales

UNICEPTA

Coronavirus Daily Media Round-Up for CIPR members





      
        
    Published 3 April 2020
    Last updated 16 July 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 July 2020
              Added details about support offered from the National Federation of Self Employed & Small Businesses (FSB).
            
            
              9 July 2020
              Added details about free recovery advice for businesses delivered by Enterprise Nation.
            
            
              14 May 2020
              Added link to Chartered Institute of Marketing's website which provides guidance on marketing for businesses.
            
            
              21 April 2020
              Mental Health at Work toolkit for small businesses and the self-employed added.
            
            
              3 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and industry
        Funding and support for businesses during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    