
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Make better use of data
  

  
  
  
      
  Use data more effectively by improving your technology, infrastructure and processes.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      6 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How making better use of data use will help your programme

        
        
          Follow the required data regulations

        
        
          Plan how you will manage your data throughout its lifecycle

        
        
          Related guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet point 10 of the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) your plans must show you’ve considered:


  how you will manage data throughout its lifecycle
  if any data you need is already available in government in part or in full
  how you collect and use data to continually improve your services
  how you can make your data accessible across government
  how the public can access your data
  how you will meet any relevant regulations


If you’re going through the spend control process you must explain how you’re trying to meet point 10.


The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


How making better use of data use will help your programme

Your programme will benefit from:


  saving time and money, by reusing open data that is already available
  reducing the risk of error and fraud, such as using standard identifiers for properties and streets to catch invalid addresses
  infrastructure and services containing consistent information
  a more consistent experience for citizens when they use government services online, which builds trust
  only collecting the data you need and only collecting it once
  making datasets interoperable to make data easier to share within your organisation and across other government organisations


Follow the required data regulations

When using data you must follow the Data Protection Act 2018 and the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).

Make sure you only hold data for specified purposes and consider the:


  
Data Ethics Framework when considering ethical issues around using and assessing data
  Open Data Principles
  
ICO’s Data Protection Impact Assessment when assessing if you’re following GDPR
  UK Digital Strategy
  the National Cyber Security Centre’s Protecting bulk personal data guidance

  
point 9 of the Service Standard on creating a secure service


Plan how you will manage your data throughout its lifecycle

Make sure your data is not dependent on the lifecycle of your technology or service. Define and manage your data’s lifecycle and storage in line with the rest of your organisation’s data estate so that you can continue to use the data for as long as you need it.

Consider using open standards to make sharing and reusing data easier. You should aim to make any of your data associated with your technology or service reusable by other government organisations. This does not include data that falls under GDPR rules or highly classified data.

Choosing the right technology, processes and training

You will need to choose the right data tools for collecting, storing, analysing, sharing and retiring data. Your choice should take into consideration the skills and capabilities you have within your organisation.

You should make sure your data collection practices meet user needs. You should also make sure your data tools and infrastructure are scalable and encourage collaboration.

Your data tools and infrastructure should:


  be understandable and accessible to staff who need to use them
  help ensure your data is current and accurate
  meet security requirements


Also consider whether your business processes include:


  training for staff
  recording the data you have and how you share it
  planning for data use across technology and services
  standardising data after collection so it’s easier to make it interoperable
  a purchasing strategy which considers the total cost of a technology tool or service through its full lifecycle
  automated decision making using the Ethics, Transparency and Accountability Framework for Automated Decision-Making



Agreeing and exiting supplier contracts

When you are using a supplier, you should make sure the contract provides you with access to all your data. Your contract must also specify the exit and renewal arrangements for your data. This includes making sure the supplier returns your data:


  in an open data standard format from the underlying database
  through an API that follows the API technical and data standards



If you are agreeing a contract of over £20 million, the supplier must provide this API, as outlined in the Model Services Contract guidance.

Storing and standardising your data

The Government’s Data Standards Authority and the Open Standards Board have approved a number of open standards for data for use by the government. Where possible and appropriate, you should use these standards to make it easier to analyse data and share it with other departments.

You should use the API technical and data standards and consider:


  where you will store your data and whether the location meets your organisation’s security requirements
  having a cloud hosting strategy

  making sure your chosen technology is scalable and adaptable for changing requirements
  making sure your data has audit trails that show how individual data records are accessed and updated
  how your organisation uses data and how easy it is to scale areas such as storage to meet your needs


Publishing and sharing your data

Follow the Data Ethics Framework to make sure you’re using data based only on user needs.

Where possible you should work in the open and publish your data. If you plan to publish data, you should consider how you will follow the:


  
Open Data Principles to ensure your data is open by default
  
government metadata standards to improve data sharing across government
  
Information Commissioner’s Office Code of Practice for data sharing to ensure you make the right decisions when sharing personal data
  
API technical and data standards and the API design guidance when developing an API to publish your data
  guidance on managing your data for access and reuse



You should also consider:


  using Open Standards to make any future data analysis easier, and where appropriate, share data with other departments
  where you publish your data
  how you can share your non-sensitive data to help minimise duplicate data sets
  what data tools and infrastructure you need to keep pace with user needs and encourage collaboration


Archiving, deleting or renewing data

You should only keep data for as long as necessary. You will need to put a process in place to help you decide when to update, delete, retire or archive your data. You should have processes to:


  decide when it is right for your organisation to retire or archive data
  decide what data you can delete and replace with new or updated data
  meet the GDPR requirement to delete an individual’s data on their request
  securely delete data when it’s no longer needed



Next: Technology Code of Practice Point 11 - Define your purchasing strategy


Related guides

Policies and guidance available includes:


  Government technology standards and guidance
  Data Ethics Framework
  Publish and use government’s open data
  
Unlocking the power of data in the UK economy and improving public confidence in its use - part 7 of the UK Digital Strategy

  
Making better use of data - part of the Government Transformation Strategy 2017-2020

  Government transformation strategy - better use of data
  
EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
  Data Protection Act 2018
  API technical and data standards
  Local Government Association - better use of data

  Open Standards for government data and technology
  Open data principles
  Digital Economy Act 2017 part 5: Codes of Practice





      
        
    Published 6 November 2017
    Last updated 31 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 March 2021
              Addition of a temporary research survey to get user feedback on the Technology Code of Practice.
            
            
              7 December 2020
              Updated content to align with the Data Standards Authority.
            
            
              20 December 2019
              This guidance has been updated based on user research and cross-government feedback.
            
            
              5 October 2018
              Addition of content about audit trails
            
            
              6 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Manage your data for access and reuse
        Integrate and adapt technology
        Make privacy integral
        Government technology standards and guidance
        Be open and use open source

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    