The 2020 election presents a paradox. Despite dramatic changes to the election process due to the COVID-19 pandemic and increasingly complex threats since the 2016 election, 2020 is widely regarded as “the most secure [election] in American history.” Operationally, it was also one of the smoothest. State and local election officials overcame unprecedented challenges and scarce resources to administer an election with fewer incidents of cyber compromises, technical failures or long lines than anticipated. After Election Day, recount procedures functioned as designed. Yet, amidst these successes, officials from both parties faced a barrage of mis- and disinformation about the election process that served to undermine confidence in the result.D3P has identified four overarching challenges policymakers and election officials at the state and federal levels must address:This report highlights D3P’s key recommendations for how these challenges can be addressed by state and federal legislators and policymakers. We believe these recommendations deserve serious consideration to create a more sustainable election ecosystem and stay ahead of challenges yet to come.It is ultimately the responsibility of state legislatures and executives to provide election officialswith sufficient guidance, funding, and authorizations to run elections smoothly and sustainably. State leaders play an especially critical role in ensuring IT security—either by directly designing, managing, and implementing IT and security systems for local election officials, or by setting standards and collaborating to meet them. Centralizing security efforts not only bolsters statewide resilience against cyber attacks, but also lowers procurement costs and ensures security standards are met in smaller jurisdictions that lack the resources to procure and manage their own infrastructure.Congress is responsible for organizing the federal government to most efficiently deliver agency support to states, while channeling public funding towards long-term, capital intensive needs. There has been, and will continue to be, a robust debate over whether federal funding for elections should come with stipulations for how it can be used. However, Congress’ first priority must be resourcing elections at a consistent, sustainable level and giving federal agencies the authorization and funding they need to better support states and localities—especially small and mid-sized jurisdictions. There is a shared responsibility between election officials, state and federal officeholders, the private sector, and civil society organizations to bolster and maintain trust in elections. The 2020 election saw an unprecedented rate of domestic election mis- and disinformation, as well as historic interest in the election and nationwide voter turnout. As citizens become increasingly interested in the process of election administration and security—and as mis- and disinformation continues to spread—governments must be trusted sources of information who can credibly respond to concerns and rebut incorrect information. Dedicated, direct collaboration with private sector entities and civil society organizations can help bridge the gap and offer channels for swift response.Another shared responsibility of the public and private sectors is investing in election security talent across all levels of government and civil society through pipeline programs that supply talented personnel to election departments. Election administration—and particularly election cybersecurity—requires a diverse talent pool of well-trained election officials with the capacity to accommodate significant changes (e.g., large increases in early voting, surges in voter interest around general and primary elections, changing methods of vote-casting, increasing rates of non-English speakers). Through academic partnerships and intergovernmental fellowships, elected officials can actively invest in developing the next generation of election security talent. Ensuring a stable and well-prepared workforce—that renews itself with young, diverse, and digitally literate talent—is a critical component of the system’s continued resilience.    Article I, Section 4 of the Constitution empowers states with the authority to regulate and run their own elections. Today, this responsibility is distributed across more than 10,000 jurisdictions at all levels of state government—each with distinct challenges, funding structures, and common characteristics. This is how the United States has run elections for over two centuries. Yet as threats to election security have grown increasingly complex in the last two decades, public dialogue about the issue has pivoted from state to  funding and policy. This shift was in part driven by the nationalization of media and the decline of local news, as well as the rise of foreign, cyber-based threats that only federal agencies have the capabilities and authorities to address. As public dialogue shifts and threats to elections evolve, the roles and responsibilities of government stakeholders—particularly between the federal and state levels—becomes more difficult to delineate.Much of the progress made in 2020 was the result of temporary fixes and one-off support that election officials cannot necessarily count on in 2022 or 2024. This included hundreds of millions of dollars in private philanthropic donations to state and local election officials and a record number of volunteers. Federal agencies made elections a top priority and ‘did what needed to be done,’ stretching their mandates to fill operational voids. Nationwide capabilities to respond to persistent cyber, information, and operational threats significantly improved since 2016, but require additional reinforcement to be sustainable.D3P’s past work and recent conversations with election professionals at the local, state, and federal levels, demonstrate the tradeoffs of increasing collaboration between state and federal governments. Through the following recommendations, we have taken pains to respect state sovereignty in the election process by focusing on what states and the federal government can each uniquely do to better secure elections.  As threats to election infrastructure grow increasingly sophisticated and the consequences of successful attacks become even more dire, most local jurisdictions simply cannot afford to maintain and secure their own IT systems. At the same time, states and their localities have grown increasingly intertwined from a cybersecurity perspective (e.g., through voter registration databases, electronic pollbooks, election night reporting systems) making election systems’ security only as strong as their weakest link. However, small changes can significantly enhance security.  Local election offices are constrained to operate under state rules, and yet in most states, there is no well-defined way of allocating the cost of operating local elections. Meanwhile, the federal government’s role in helping to pay for elections remains unclear—leaving states to reckon with chronic under-funding.  In establishing CISA as a dedicated agency, the Trump administration successfully built on the Obama administration’s blueprint for defending state election systems as “critical infrastructure.” This move enabled the federal government to provide cybersecurity assistance to state and local election officials and “[enjoy] all the benefits and protections of critical infrastructure that the U.S. government has to offer”—however, redundancies in the roles and responsibilities of the EAC and ESI remain. Election officials still occasionally have to navigate the federal bureaucracy to get the full benefit of support from other agencies like the Department of Defense (DoD), Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and Center for Disease Control (CDC), to name a few. Meanwhile, declining federal funding for the EAC has hindered its ability to execute its mission and expand its reach to small and mid-sized jurisdictions. In an ideal world, Congress would consolidate all federal support for elections into a single entity. However, the most realistic option at this time is for Congress to build on what’s working and clarify EAC and CISA’s roles so that states have clarity on where to get support. This will allow the two entities to institutionalize and expand best practices coming out of 2020.Broadly speaking, CISA should be more clearly authorized to convene interagency collaboration and organize federal support for election infrastructure and cyber-related matters. Meanwhile, the EAC should focus on expanding its role as a national clearinghouse of resources for election officials and take the lead on developing new resources of non-infrastructure best practices for election officials, such as how state and local officials can best educate voters and manage mis- and disinformation. The following recommendations ( and ) present a clear delineation between CISA, which is mandated “to enhance the security and resilience of election infrastructure” by supporting election administration with cyber-related responsibilities (e.g., cybersecurity assessments, detection and prevention), and the EAC, which is mandated to improve voter experience by supporting election administrators with non-infrastructure responsibilities (e.g., ballot design, training, public engagement).   Congress can further clarify the division of labor between CISA and the EAC by changing and enhancing the EAC’s role in the following ways: Since HAVA provided over $4 billion in direct support for states to update voting infrastructure in 2002, the federal government has provided funding for elections on an ad hoc basis, including $1.2 billion since the 2018 midterms—$400 million of which was from the CARES Act as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While estimates vary, consensus indicates that getting jurisdictions ‘caught up’ on needed security, technology, and audits will cost approximately $2 billion over the next four years.    In 2018, the Allow States and Victims to Fight Online Sex Trafficking Act (FOSTA) carved out a new exception to Section 230—one of the most impactful clauses of the Communications Decency Act of 1996. Section 230 states that “no provider or user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider.” This protects websites that host speech from laws that might otherwise be used to hold them legally responsible for what their users say or do online and offline—and in turn, subverts the cost-benefit analysis of actively mitigating mis- and disinformation. Just as FOSTA holds social media firms accountable to fighting sex trafficking by reducing their legal protections, a new carve out of Section 230 can hold platforms accountable to fighting election-related disinformation during election season. This statute could narrowly permit states’ chief election officials to sue social media firms if they don’t do enough to remove mis- or disinformation about the elections they administer. Relevant content could include false information about how to vote and the election process, but also false allegations of fraud.  This recommendation emulates the Defense Acquisition University (DAU)—a corporate university of the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) that provides ongoing technology, logistics, and acquisitions training to military personnel. DAU leverages partnerships with colleges and universities—including American University, Purdue University, SUNY Empire State College, and UCLA Extension School—that allow DoD workforce members to transfer DAU course credits toward degrees and certificates. By working with these universities and other civil society stakeholders, state and federal election professionals can share the responsibility of standardizing and scaling election security training. Expanding partnerships with city and state universities could be critical to establishing a deeper, more experienced bench of election administrators, whose highly specific knowledge and expertise— including, but not limited to, cybersecurity—is critical to minimizing incidents of all kinds and responding appropriately before, during, and after elections ().  A fellowship program can create new pathways for talent into election administration, andcan help election officials bridge the gap between preparation and execution of election security measures and user experience during the peak period of future election cycles (e.g., June through November). For example, the University of Chicago’s Election Cyber Surge program matched “volunteer cybersecurity professionals with local election officials to help them protect their voter registration databases, websites and anything else that might be targeted by foreign adversaries.” These programs not only embed top talent in government to improve public programs, but also serve as a unique entry point for highly-skilled young people who might not have considered a career in government service before the experience ().  The above recommendations are meant to shed light for state and federal lawmakers on some of the most pressing challenges and opportunities facing the U.S. election system today. However, they are by no means comprehensive. We acknowledge that the environments and obstacles facing state and local election officials across all jurisdictions require unique solutions, and that state and federal budget shortfalls are not unique to election security. We also acknowledge that investing resources in election administration comes at the cost of investing in other pressing issues. However, electing officials who represent the will of the American people requires a secure election system that citizens trust. Election security should never need to be a crisis-driven issue—but despite the successes of 2020, the U.S. election system is facing innumerable, existential challenges that threaten one of the most defining features of democracy. Without swift, sufficient action from state and federal government leadership, widespread distrust in the 2020 election process and outcome will further deteriorate and destabilize the only institutions that can address this problem.As the world’s oldest continuous democracy, the United States holds a unique position as a beacon for self-rule throughout the world. In order to ensure that our democracy continues to set a global example, we must ensure that election security is a priority, not something we deal with only when the system is in crisis. The devolved nature of our election ecosystem is a strength; both because democracy is best administered at its grassroots, and because of the opportunity for innovation that local sovereignty presents. Our challenge now is to ensure that local, state, and federal officials work together to confront a more complex and difficult set of challenges than our democracy has ever encountered. If D3P’s nationwide work with committed public servants is any indication, we are confident America’s election officials and elected leaders who play a role in upholding and defending democracy can meet the challenge. 