
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    How to sell to or work with Dstl
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance on the many ways for suppliers to work with the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), the science inside UK defence and security.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      1 July 2014
      Last updated
      
        2 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Why work with us

        
        
          Areas of work

        
        
          How you can sell to or work with us

        
        
          Selling directly to Dstl


        
        
          Be part of the wider Dstl supply chain, working with our existing framework supply partners

        
        
          What else you might like to know before working with us

        
        
          Other organisations we work with

        
        
          Contact

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Dstl works alongside a range of suppliers to provide our customers with the best science and technology, research and capabilities to protect the UK’s security and advance the UK’s defence interests. Find out more about who we are and what we do.

This page explains how to become a supplier and where to find the opportunities that are available.



  
    See our current priorities for research and investment.
  
  
    Sign up for our series of webinars to highlight exciting new opportunities and give information on how to bid for work. For more information email searchlight@dstl.gov.uk
  



We work with external suppliers unless there’s a clear reason not to: see our science and technology procurement criteria (MS Word Document, 39.5 KB)

We want to make it easier for innovative suppliers to work with us, including:


  suppliers who have not traditionally worked with Dstl, the MOD or in the defence sector before
  small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)


SMEs: A guide to working with government provides advice for small and medium sized enterprises on how to bid for and win government contracts. The Dstl SME action plan 2020 to 2025 tells you more about what we are doing to make it easier for SMEs to work with us, including:


  providing clearer guidance
  making sure our framework supply partners advertise sub-contracting opportunities
  simplifying our contracting process
  ensuring that SMEs are paid promptly




Subscribe to our regular supplier email for the latest science and technology news and events, development in our work, information about new and existing contracts and case studies.


Why work with us

Suppliers working with Dstl have the opportunity to:


  work with world-class scientists and technologists at the cutting edge of innovation
  benefit from increased funding for defence: around half of Dstl’s £multi-million science and technology budget is spent with industry and academia
  test and improve concepts with input from members of the armed forces
  benefit from the experience and expertise of our framework supply partners
  gain access to state-of-the-art facilities for development and testing
  retain intellectual property rights, boosting longer-term prosperity
  have a real impact on improving the UK’s security and defence


Areas of work

Dstl is an executive agency of the Ministry of Defence (MOD). Around half of MOD’s science and technology budget, managed by Dstl, is spent with industry and academia.

Our work covers everything from space to artificial intelligence. Find out more about our work and read the .

How you can sell to or work with us

Dstl expects suppliers to:


  adhere to all applicable laws (including UK data protection legislation)
  maintain the highest standards of integrity and professionalism in their business dealings
  comply with the Government Commercial Function codes of conduct

  comply with Dstl’s  quality requirements



Suppliers should also be aware of guidance on trading with the EU.

Dstl reserves the right to exclude a supplier who has been convicted of any of the offences or misconduct listed in either the MOD or Dstl ‘statement relating to good standing.’


You can:


  
sell directly to Dstl, or
  be part of the wider Dstl supply chain, working with our existing framework supply partners




Selling directly to Dstl


By default we buy all goods and services through open competition, as set out in UK law for public sector procurement, and follow MOD’s procurement process. Dstl do not currently use MOD’s contracting, purchasing and finance (CP and F) system.

Dstl do not operate ‘preferred’ supplier lists.

In a typical competition:


  
Dstl advertise our requirements.
  Suppliers complete a pre-qualification questionnaire. The pre-qualification stage may be skipped for certain requirements.
  If suppliers meet the pre-qualification selection criteria, we invite them to tender.
  We evaluate tenders using pre-agreed, objective assessment criteria. From June 2021 we will also take account of social value in our evaluations.
  We choose a supplier or suppliers based on this assessment.
  We award the contract to the successful bidder and give feedback to all suppliers who want it.


Find opportunities


  We advertise tender and contract opportunities valued over £10,000 in the Defence Sourcing Portal (DSP). Access and registration is free.
  We also advertise these contracts using the government’s Contracts Finder portal, alongside opportunities from other government departments and public bodies. Access is free of charge.
  
Dstl also uses a dynamic procurement system called R-Cloud to match suppliers’ capabilities and skills to our requirements. Register to join the R-Cloud at any time. If matched to a requirement, we invite suppliers to express their interest in the opportunity and take part in a competitive tender process.
  Our contract notices make it clear when opportunities are suitable for consortia to tender. For example, smaller companies can collaborate with other SMEs to meet the requirements.
  Requirements below £10,000 are often one-off projects; these are procured or bought in accordance with Dstl’s policy for low value purchasing.
  The Defence and Security Accelerator occasionally runs funding opportunities on behalf of Dstl.
  
Dstl operates a number of PhD programmes. We welcome applications to PhD level research calls from UK institutions with leading academics, research groups or research centres, including public sector research establishments (PSREs).


Be part of the wider Dstl supply chain, working with our existing framework supply partners

Dstl has established science and technology (S&T) framework agreements for use across government. Suppliers can join them to become part of the UK government supply chain.


Current Dstl priorities for research and investment

Details of the S&T procurement frameworks including:


  when the frameworks start and finish and what they cover
  who to contact (the supplier managing the framework) to find out about current opportunities


Dstl Capability and Framework Guide (MS Powerpoint Presentation, 472 KB) mapping our strategic S&T capabilities to the procurement frameworks and summarising our routes to market.


We also encourage our framework supply partners to advertise sub-contracting opportunities on the Defence Sourcing Portal.

What else you might like to know before working with us

Transparency and the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)

If you’re successfully awarded a public sector contract, including those advertised by Dstl, details from it may then be published under transparency regulations. The criteria for redactions will be in line with the exemptions set out by the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA); Dstl will assess their applications in discussion with suppliers.

Intellectual property

Dstl protects our partners’ intellectual property (IP), but we reserve the right for UK government to use the results of research and development funded by the UK taxpayer.

You can also licence some of our technologies through the Easy Access IP scheme, or via Ploughshare Innovations which was was formed in 2005 to commercialise and exploit Dstl’s intellectual property generated from its research.

For international (non-UK) suppliers

CPNI and the National Cyber Security Centre have produced some guidance aimed at raising awareness of risks associated with working internationally:


  for academics: Trusted Research

  for industry: Thinking securely about your business



Other organisations we work with

We work with a number of other organisations at the forefront of innovation in science and technology for defence. These include:


  the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA)

  Innovate UK
  Defence Solutions Centre (DSC)
  the Knowledge Transfer Network (KTN)

  Tech UK
  the National Labs Alliance (NLA)
  ADS Group Aerospace, Defence, Security and Space
  Team Defence UK
  the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB)

  the Advanced Research and Invention Agency (ARIA)



Contact

For further information or queries contact srm@dstl.gov.uk


Subscribe to our regular supplier email for the latest science and technology news and events, development in our work, information about new and existing contracts and case studies.






      
        
    Published 1 July 2014
    Last updated 2 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 September 2021
              Updated Dstl Capability and Framework Guide.
            
            
              18 August 2021
              Updated links to S&T procurement framework information, under the heading 'Be part of the wider Dstl supply chain'.
            
            
              20 July 2021
              Updated Dstl Capability and Framework Guide.
            
            
              4 March 2021
              Fully updated guide including expectations for suppliers and how to find opportunities.
            
            
              3 November 2020
              Updated sections on transparency and engaging with small and medium enterprises (SMEs).
            
            
              2 September 2020
              Updated Framework and Capabilities.
            
            
              2 September 2020
              Updated frameworks and capabilities
            
            
              21 October 2019
              Updated guidance added
            
            
              15 April 2019
              Addition of information of SME Searchlight initiative
            
            
              14 February 2019
              Added a new academic alliance
            
            
              25 July 2018
              A web link edit.
            
            
              11 July 2018
              Description and length of term amended on University Defence Research Collaboration (UDRC) in Signal Processing.
            
            
              10 July 2018
              Added a new open call for the University Defence Research Collaboration in signal processing
            
            
              12 June 2018
              Removed MURI (Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative) from list of ways to work with us, as none are currently planned.
            
            
              10 April 2018
              Added Serapis details.
            
            
              8 December 2016
              Updating CDE with the Defence and Security Accelerator following organisational change
            
            
              4 November 2015
              Added information and link for the Dstl Synthetic Environment Tower of Excellence (SE Tower).
            
            
              21 July 2015
              Added details of the US DoD Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (MURI) programme.
            
            
              5 February 2015
              Added information about Easy Access IP.
            
            
              1 July 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        R-Cloud
        Dstl science and technology procurement frameworks
        How to license Dstl technologies
        AI and data science: defence science and technology capability
        Dstl research and funding priorities

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        DASA Standard Terms and Conditions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    