
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Forensic pathology: role within the Home Office
  

  
  
  
      
  Information on the role of the Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit and its support of the Pathology Delivery Board.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      26 March 2013
      Last updated
      
        18 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Pathology Delivery Board

        
        
          Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit

        
        
          Forensic pathology group practices

        
        
          Complaints

        
        
          Careers in forensic pathology

        
        
          Other information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Forensic pathology is a service provided to the coroners and police forces in England and Wales to assist in the investigation of homicide or suspicious death cases.

Home Office-registered forensic pathologists work within regional group practices, which are independent of the police, coroners and the Home Office. Group practices are currently structured so that pathologists working within them may be self-employed or employed by a university hospital or a hospital trust.

This guide gives information on:


  how forensic pathologists are vetted and registered
  the codes and protocols which inform and regulate the way in which they work
  the Home Office register of forensic pathologists (‘the register’)

  the Pathology Delivery Board (PDB) and details of its membership
  the Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit, which monitors the standards set by the Forensic Science Regulator



Pathology Delivery Board

The PDB oversees the provision of forensic pathology services in England and Wales. You can read the constitution of the PDB.

For information on how the Pathology Delivery Board handle and process personal information and data, please read the Privacy Information Notice (PDF, 175KB, 6 pages).

The PDB (on behalf of the Home Secretary) recognises pathologists who have sufficient qualifications, training and experience to act on behalf of coroners and police in suspicious death and homicide cases. Applications to join the register are reviewed by the PDB and applicants are accepted onto the register only if they meet a strict criteria.

You can read the criteria for registration and the protocol Home Office-registered pathologists should abide by.


PDB membership

The board reports directly to the Home Secretary and is made up of stakeholders representing the following organisations:


  Home Office registered forensic pathologists
  National Police Chiefs’ Council
  Chief Coroner
  Coroners Society
  British Association in Forensic Medicine
  Crown Prosecution Service
  Royal College of Pathologists
  Forensic Science Regulator
  Human Tissue Authority
  Ministry of Justice


Revalidation and annual appraisals

Under the Medical Profession (Responsible Officers) (Amendment) Regulations 2013, the PDB is the designated organisation with responsibility for the oversight of appraisal and revalidation of Home Office registered forensic pathologists in England and Wales.

As part of its legal obligation under the regulations, the PDB has appointed an independent ‘Responsible Officer’ to oversee a system of annual appraisals that form part of the 5-year General Medical Council (GMC) revalidation process. View the PDB Responsible Officer Policy (PDF, 217KB, 15 pages).

It is the responsibility of all Home Office registered forensic pathologists to participate in the annual appraisal and revalidation process.

The PDB’s independent responsible officer may also act as a ‘suitable person’ for other specialist pathologists who undertake police case work but who are not on the Home Office register and do not have a prescribed connection to any other body.  This may include other sub speciality disciplines such as forensic ophthalmic and forensic neuro pathologists for example.

You can download the annual appraisal forms, supporting documents and guidance. These forms, along with other useful documents, can also be found under other information.

Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit

The role of the Home Office Forensic Pathology Unit (HOFPU), based within the Home Office science directorate, is to monitor and maintain those standards pertaining to forensic pathology as set by the Home Office, Royal College of Pathologists and the Forensic Science Regulator.  The unit acts as the secretariat to the PDB as well as administering the appraisal process for forensic pathologists.

The HOFPU supports and funds the training of trainee forensic pathologists; investigates complaints made against members of the register; conducts research into homicide and forensic pathology related issues, and maintains close liaison with regional forensic pathology user groups and other key stakeholders.

Contact details

Please consider sending all correspondence by email instead of post. If this is not possible, please inform the office by email or telephone that you will be sending in documentation.



Forensic Pathology Unit
14th Floor, Lunar House (long corridor)
40 Wellesley Road
Croydon
CR9 2BY



Telephone: 0300 106 4829
From overseas: 0044 300 106 4829
Email: pathology@homeoffice.gov.uk

Forensic pathology group practices

Nationally, there are 6 regional forensic pathology group practices supporting coroners and the police in England and Wales. Each group practice must consist of a minimum of 3 Home Office registered forensic pathologists.

All members of the register are required to be members of a group practice as a condition of registration. Members of the register are not permitted to practice independently, outside of a formal group practice arrangement. The PDB has published a definition of a group practice.

Within group practices, forensic pathologists agree to abide by the code of practice  jointly produced by the Home Office, Royal College of Pathologists, Forensic Science Regulator and the Department of Justice of Northern Ireland.

Complaints

The PDB ensures that the high standards expected of Home Office registered forensic pathologists are maintained. Pathologists are subject to suitability rules, which replace the disciplinary rules on 1st January 2013.

If you wish to make a complaint against a registered forensic pathologist, you can email the Home Office pathology unit.

Careers in forensic pathology

You must first qualify as a medical doctor before going on to specialise in forensic pathology. This specialism is governed and controlled by the:


  General Medical Council
  Royal College of Pathologists


These bodies can provide guidance on careers in forensic pathology.

Other information


  A review of forensic pathology in England and Wales: submitted to the Minister of State for Crime Prevention, March 2015: the ‘Hutton Review’
  A study into decision making at the initial scene of unexpected death
  Annual appraisals for forensic pathologists
  Guidance: dealing with sudden and unexpected death and the medical investigation
  Guidance: provision of human tissue to the defence
  Legal issues in forensic pathology and tissue retention: issue 2 guidance
  Memorandum of understanding between the General Medical Council and the Pathology Delivery Board
  Pathology Delivery Board minutes
  Police human tissue audit: 2010 to 2012
  Proposed human tissue policy for police forces
  Provision of forensic pathology services in event of regulatory action by HTA
  Taking and retaining human tissue in a post mortem examination
  The role of forensic pathologists






      
        
    Published 26 March 2013
    Last updated 18 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              18 June 2021
              Corrected telephone number for the Forensic Pathology Unit - 0300 106 4829 or from overseas 0044 300 106 4829.
            
            
              25 September 2020
              Added the PDB Responsible Officer policy.
            
            
              27 January 2020
              Added a link to proposed human tissue policy for police forces.
            
            
              25 October 2017
              Guidance on sudden unexpected death published.
            
            
              16 September 2016
              Updated information published.
            
            
              26 January 2016
              Added guidance on taking human tissue in post mortems, the role of a forensic pathologist and a study into decision making at the initial scene of unexpected death.
            
            
              16 November 2015
              Added a review of forensic pathology in England and Wales by Professor Peter Hutton
            
            
              5 April 2013
              Forensic Pathology Unit contact details added.
            
            
              26 March 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Understanding disabilities and impairments: user profiles
        Home Office register of forensic pathologists
        Examples of tables and charts to use on GOV.UK
        Sample accessible document policy
        GOV.UK content principles: conventions and research background

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Policing and crime prevention

  


  

  


    
  


    