
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Business Data Survey 2021: information for survey participants
  

  
  
  
      
  What you need to know about being part of the UK Business Data Survey 2021.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      2 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Details

        
        
          Who is being invited to take part?

        
        
          Who is conducting the survey?

        
        
          Contacts

        
        
          Data protection and privacy notice

        
        
          Enquiries

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

The UK Business Data Survey 2021 gathers evidence on the importance and awareness of data use for UK businesses.

Details

The UK Business Data Survey is a telephone and online-based study of UK businesses. It seeks to understand the role and importance of personal and non-personal data in UK businesses, domestic and international transfers of data, and the awareness of, and attitudes toward, data protection legislation and policy.

This is the second time this survey has been carried out. Ipsos MORI has been commissioned to carry out the survey fieldwork which takes place from November 2021 to January 2022.

During this period some organisations will be called by an Ipsos MORI interviewer from their Edinburgh office (an 0131 number) inviting them to take part. You may also receive an email to let you know Ipsos MORI has called and inviting you to reply. You may be offered the option of completing the survey online and, if so, you will receive the survey link via email from Ipsos MORI - Ukbusinessdatasurvey@ipsos-mori.com

Who is being invited to take part?

Businesses across the UK have been selected at random from the Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) business database, whilst ensuring a spread across different sectors and numbers of employees.

Who is conducting the survey?

Ipsos MORI is carrying out the survey on behalf of the Department for Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS).

Ipsos MORI is a well-known survey organisation in the UK. It carries out research studies in the areas of social and public policy, covering topics such as sport, culture, health, science, education, crime and employment.

More information about Ipsos MORI.

Contacts

To contact Ipsos MORI about the survey, please find the relevant contact details below

Tel: 020 3059 4967
Email: Ukbusinessdatasurvey@ipsos-mori.com

Data protection and privacy notice

For general information on how DCMS handles personal data, please read DCMS’s personal information charter.

More detailed information about how your personal data is processed, as well as your rights under the data protection legislation, is available in the below DCMS privacy notice.


  
      
  
  
    UK Business Data Survey 2021 Privacy Notice
    
        PDF, 219KB, 5 pages
    


  


For any data protection queries please contact the DCMS Data Protection Officer: dcmsdataprotection@dcms.gov.uk or call 0808 202 4971.

Please visit the Ipsos MORI website to access the Ipsos MORI privacy notice for the survey.

The Information Commissioner’s Office has produced a guide to your rights. If you are not happy with the way we are processing your data, you have the right to lodge a complaint to the Information Commissioner’s Office about our practices, or you can call their helpline on 0303 123 1113.

Enquiries

For general queries about the questionnaire and survey outputs, please contact the UK Business Data Survey team at DCMS: ukbusinessdatasurvey@dcms.gov.uk




      
        
    Published 2 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    