
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults: county lines
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for frontline professionals on dealing with county lines, part of the government’s approach to ending gang violence and exploitation.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      11 July 2017
      Last updated
      
        7 February 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults: county lines
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults: county lines
    
        PDF, 223KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance outlines what county lines (and associated criminal exploitation) is, signs to look for in potential victims, and what to do about it. It does not provide information about the entirety of the county lines issue.

The document is a supplement to an organisation’s existing safeguarding policies, to help identify and protect those exploited through this criminal activity. It’s also aimed at:


  local partners in policing
  local authorities
  the voluntary sector


This guidance is part of the cross-government approach to ending gang violence and exploitation.




        
      

      
    Published 11 July 2017
    Last updated 7 February 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 February 2020
              HTML version added.
            
            
              17 September 2018
              New version of county lines guidance pdf uploaded.
            
            
              11 July 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Serious Violence Strategy
        Advice to schools and colleges on gangs and youth violence
        Early intervention youth fund
        Forced marriage
        County lines: criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults

  




      

    Collection

  


        County lines: criminal exploitation of children and vulnerable adults

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Knife, gun and gang crime

  


  

  


    
  


    