
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Biometrics self-enrolment feasibility trials: privacy information notice
  

  
  

  
    
  How your personal information is used within biometrics self-enrolment feasibility trials.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      8 November 2021
      Last updated
      
        23 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Biometrics self-enrolment feasibility trials: privacy information notice
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
When foreign nationals want to visit or migrate to the UK, some of them are required to provide face and fingerprint biometrics ahead of travel, to enable identity and security checks. British citizens already do this when travelling to some other countries, such as the US.

To maximise convenience and security, the Home Office will increasingly look at where remote self-enrolment of face and fingerprint biometrics can be used by foreign nationals applying to come to the UK. For example, this could include using a smartphone to self-enrol biometrics from home. To understand whether this is possible, the Home Office need to test the performance and usability of these emerging biometric technologies. These feasibility trials are one of the early stages of doing this.

This page provides details of the privacy information notice (PIN) accompanying the consent form for trial participants.



        
      

      
    Published 8 November 2021
    Last updated 23 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 November 2021
              Added iProov to list of suppliers.
            
            
              12 November 2021
              List of suppliers updated.
            
            
              10 November 2021
              List of suppliers updated.
            
            
              8 November 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Factsheet on Intellectual Property and Life Sciences in China
        Quality report: Child Benefit statistics
        Factsheet to support Chinese companies with overseas IP protection and technology commercialisation (Chinese-language)
        Protecting Intellectual Property in China during the COVID-19 Period
        Preliminary report on the Renewable Heat Premium Payment metering programme

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability

  


  

  


    
  


    