
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    ETL product types: commercial refrigeration equipment
  

  
  

  
    
  Product descriptions for equipment eligible for the Energy Technology List, explaining the refrigeration energy and cost savings.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      1 February 2014
      Last updated
      
        20 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    ETL769 Commercial refrigeration equipment
    
        
          Ref: ETL769
        
        PDF, 529KB, 12 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ETL769 Commercial refrigeration equipment
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The leaflet explains the requirements for and energy-saving benefits of the different types of equipment in this category including:


  cellar cooling equipment
  professional refrigerated storage cabinets
  refrigerated display cabinets
  curtains, blinds, doors and covers for refrigerated display cabinets
  refrigeration compressors
  refrigeration system controls


See the Energy Technology Product List for the eligible products in this category, listed by brand name.

See the Energy Technology Criteria List.



        
      

      
    Published 1 February 2014
    Last updated 20 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 April 2020
              Added HTML version of leaflet.
            
            
              13 December 2018
              Updated in line with changes to the ETL criteria for this technology.
            
            
              1 February 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        ETL product types: pipework insulation equipment
        ETL product types: heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment
        ETL product types: compressed air equipment
        ETL product types: motors and drives
        ETL product types: air-to-air energy recovery

  




      

    Collection

  


        Energy Technology List (ETL): product types

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Greenhouse gas emissions
        Business and the environment

  


  

  


    
  


    