
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Call for Nominations: Science Programme Advisory Committee
  

  
  

  
    
  The UK Space Agency seeks nominations for membership of its Science Programme Advisory Committee (SPAC).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      28 July 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Call for Nominations: Science Programme Advisory Committee
    
        PDF, 166KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The SPAC is responsible for advising the Agency on the overall strategy for involvement in space science projects, taking account of issues relating to Space Science, technology, industry, potential spin-off applications, science and society opportunities, education, and skills. SPAC provides advice on the ranking and relative priority of current and potential future space science projects as an input to both funding and review decisions conducted by or for the UK Space Agency. The Committee also advises UK Space Agency’s ESA Science Programme Committee (SPC) delegation on UK positions for SPC meetings, as well as wider opportunities and benefits arising from the space science programme and the broader industrial and academic community. Membership of the SPAC consists of representatives of the academic and industrial groups from across the breadth of relevant subject areas.

Nominations should be made by email, no later than 1st September at 16:00.



        
      

      
    Published 28 July 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    