

RAND Europe was commissioned by Wellcome to analyse the role and contribution of the Sanger Institute and the Wellcome Genome Campus within the field of genetics and genomics, set within the context of four comparator organisations.




Read Online

Wellcome Sanger Institute and Wellcome Genome Campus Landscape Review
by Sarah Parkinson, Joe Francombe, Cagla Stevenson, Hamish Evans, Advait Deshpande, Susan Guthrie
Related Topics: Genetics, Program Evaluation
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


2.8 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

What is the role of Sanger and the Wellcome Genome Campus in the genetics and genomics research landscape?What are potential areas of opportunity for Sanger and the Genome Campus to further contribute to the genetics and genomics research landscape?



RAND Europe was commissioned by Wellcome to analyse the role and contribution of the Wellcome Sanger Institute and the Wellcome Genome Campus within the field of genetics and genomics. The study also looked at four comparator organisations—the Broad Institute, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Janelia Research Campus and the National Human Genome Research Institute. The methods for this study consisted of desk research, case studies, interviews and bibliometric analysis.
Our review found that the main strengths of the Sanger Institute and Genome Campus centre around their leadership and convening role in many international research collaborations, which is also a strength for other large research institutes such as the Broad Institute. The Sanger Institute prioritises openness in sharing data and tools and publishing research, which helps them achieve impact from their work. However, this approach has meant that commercialisation of research has not been as strong as compared to other organisations. The field of genetics and genomics is advancing rapidly, particularly due to availability and affordability of high throughput sequencing technologies, which has changed the competitive advantage that such technologies offer to organisations. The next challenge will be to find a direction for these organisations to explore that fits with their scale, operating environments, unique strengths and values. In the case of Sanger, this means finding an approach that capitalises on their ethos of openness, data sharing and collaboration to shape the development of the field over the coming years.
Key Findings

The Sanger Institute and other large research institutes such as the Broad Institute and NHGRI often play key roles in convening and leading large international research consortia on collaborative projects. This collaborative approach can serve not just as a vehicle for the advancement of genetics and genomics, but also as a vehicle for the broadening of participation and capacity development across the research landscape.

The Sanger Institute and other organisations at the Wellcome Genome Campus are committed to data sharing, open access and open research, which has helped them achieve impact from their work. However, there is some suggestion that this openness, combined with a clear focus on fundamental research has contributed to a lower level of commercialisation activity for the Sanger Institute compared with some other organisations such as the Broad Institute.

A key strength of the Sanger Institute and other large research institutes such as the Broad Institute is the capacity to undertake genetic and genomic science at scale. High speed and high throughput genomic sequencing technology has helped organisations distinguish themselves, but this kind of technology no longer provides the same competitive advantage since it is becoming more affordable and accessible. This presents both challenges and opportunities for organisations as they look for new ways to differentiate themselves within the research landscape.



 Related Products 








Project
Reviewing the role and contributions of the Wellcome Sanger Institute and Genome Campus

Jan 20, 2021






Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction

Chapter Two
Review of Wellcome Sanger Institute and Wellcome Genome Campus

Chapter Three
Comparator institutions

Chapter Four
Case studies

Chapter Five
Reflections

Annex A
Methodology

Annex B
Interview protocols

Annex C
Case study structure




Research conducted by

RAND Europe



This research was commissioned by Wellcome and conducted by RAND Europe.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 142
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA215-1
Document Number: RR-A215-1
Year: 2021
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

GeneticsProgram Evaluation

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Parkinson, Sarah, Joe Francombe, Cagla Stevenson, Hamish Evans, Advait Deshpande, and Susan Guthrie, Wellcome Sanger Institute and Wellcome Genome Campus Landscape Review. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA215-1.html.
Parkinson, Sarah, Joe Francombe, Cagla Stevenson, Hamish Evans, Advait Deshpande, and Susan Guthrie, Wellcome Sanger Institute and Wellcome Genome Campus Landscape Review, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A215-1, 2021. As of December 16, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA215-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



