As banks stare down potentially several more years of a low interest rate environment—and a possible wave of credit losses—many are looking to fortify their income statements. Some will be tightening their belts. Others will focus on top-line growth to offset lower margins and losses. In either case, many banks globally are realizing that more efficiently and effectively delivering for their customers can both reduce costs and improve sales.With these objectives in mind, many banks are seeking to transform their customer , hoping to both capture financial upside and make their customers happier. For a long time many banks believed that customer experience was a trade-off with efficiency: the implicit assumption was that better experiences cost more money to deliver. In fact, banks have learned in the past decade that better experiences for customers lead to increased throughput in their sales journeys (and therefore more revenue)  lower friction in service journeys (and therefore lower cost to serve). In short, customer experience performance does not require a trade-off with financial performance; in fact, for many banks, it is a primary driver  financial performance. We have seen the financial value of experience time and again in both consumer and commercial banking. Recent examples include:Short-term gains are only part of the story. Over the long term, banks that excel in measures of customer experience also lead on revenue and expense performance, and see sustained improvements in shareholders returns. Between 2009 and 2019, experience leaders in banking delivered 55 percent higher total shareholder returns compared to firms with low customer experience performance, based on an analysis of shareholder returns and McKinsey customer experience benchmarking.Despite the clear value in improved customer experience,  on their financial promise. Those that do, based on our experience and analysis, share six features:There are five questions that leadership teams can discuss and debate to help unlock the value customer experience programs can deliver, whether the bank is just getting started or in the midst of a program that isn’t bearing fruit:What business metrics are we committing to improve—and by how much? What customer journeys matter the most to our customers and to improving those metrics?What specific aspects of these important journeys will we improve? How do we know those improvements will matter? How will we know we have succeeded? What KPIs will we monitor? How will we course correct until we succeed? What specific segments of customers will experience impact first? When will they start to see the changes?