As organizations plan for re-entry and recovery amid the COVID-19 pandemic, leaders have an opportunity to engage and strengthen overall connections with employees. Recognizing and addressing the core human emotions of grief, loss, and anxiety in the workplace offer a chance to rebuild organizational health, productivity, and talent retention. Clear and inspiring communication is central to re-entry success. In addition to moving decisively on strategic changes, leaders must help rattled workforces believe in the future.  of communication messaging and activity can help employees transition from loss to renewal. Leaders should design the right approach toward communicating for their organization’s circumstances, culture, and history by taking the steps outlined below.Leaders must understand where employees are mentally and prepare for re-entry accordingly. For example, in addition to health and safety considerations, employees are facing long-term uncertainty around lockdowns and job insecurity. Practical steps that leaders should take in this phase include:Employees have experienced varying degrees of trauma and loss throughout the pandemic. It is important that leaders cultivate open and compassionate conversations, validate emotional impact and that it can be discussed in the workplace, and look for ways to honor the past. Practical steps to take include:COVID-19 has created unprecedented upheaval in the lives of organizations. New rituals, alongside company values and a renewed sense of purpose, can serve as pillars of psychological safety and normality. Practical steps to take in this phase include:Leaders can use this moment to define and demonstrate a common sense of purpose with employees. When decision makers align decision-making and communication messaging with a sense of purpose, they can support their employees’ potential at a time when it is most needed. Practical steps include:***Recovery will challenge organizations’ communications functions to become increasingly agile—and human. While leaders may , if they communicate openly and candidly, employees will respect being brought into the conversation.More about these four phases, including how to implement associated practical steps, can be found in our article, “.”***Career Exchange is a COVID-19 response initiative offered at no cost to companies hiring, furloughing, or laying off individuals. It is a digital talent marketplace that aims to address the mismatch of labor supply and demand, helping organizations and individuals. McKinsey & Company supports the platform as part of our commitment to safeguarding livelihoods.  or visit the  to sign up.