In addition to its impact on lives and livelihoods, COVID-19 disrupted our sense of place. Familiar out-and-about spaces—stores, restaurants, places of worship, gyms, schools, and offices—made themselves comfortable in our homes. As we shopped online and ordered delivery, gathered around laptops for religious services and yoga sessions, and turned our dining rooms into classrooms, the line between work and home all but dissolved. As we , we are also re-evaluating  and  we want to work and even the .The return to the workplace will not be a throwback to the way things once were. : 64 percent prefer a hybrid model rather than fully onsite (17 percent) or completely remote (19 percent). Furthermore, 29 percent say they will look for a different job if required to return fully onsite. Nor will it be a concrete “new” normal. Rather, it will be a “next” normal that will evolve over time as leaders and employees work together to “learn into” what works. While many organizations have announced a general intent to embrace hybrid work going forward,  too few have expressed a clear post-pandemic vision.How can employers get this right? Communication is key.  must create a thoughtful, open, ongoing, and two-way dialogue with employees, partnering to shape the solution from the onset. The return to the workplace is not about a swift, single decision, but the start of a journey to define what’s next. Employers should share their broad direction, aspiration, and key principles now, then continue to listen, discuss, and act in partnership with their employees as answers emerge and evolve.With this in mind, here are four principles leaders can incorporate into communication efforts:As your next normal starts to take shape, strive to share more with employees, including your uncertainty about the future and its evolution. Invite them to “learn into” the journey with you. Employees don’t expect their leaders to know all the answers, but they do want to be included in the process, and they expect leaders to  of organizational decisions in periods of volatile change. Embracing these four communications principles can help.