
      



  
    


      
    Promotional material
  

  
  
    UK points-based immigration system: employer information
  

  
  

  
    
  Information for employers on the UK’s points-based immigration system. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Visas and Immigration

      
      Published
      9 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        20 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    The UK's points-based immigration system: an introduction for employers (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    The UK's points-based immigration system: an introduction for employers
    
        PDF, 1.07MB, 16 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Becoming a sponsor of skilled migrant workers (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Becoming a sponsor of skilled migrant workers
    
        PDF, 286KB, 1 page
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Podcast transcript: Business and the future of immigration in 2021
    
        PDF, 158KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Information to share with your employees

You can give your employees the leaflet: Understanding your right to work in the UK: EU, EEA and Swiss citizens.

Carrying out right to work checks

To assist you in carrying out right to work checks, we have developed a right to work check video.

Podcast on business and the future of immigration in 2021


The Home Office published a podcast episode in partnership with Intelligence Squared in 2020 to help you understand the points-based immigration system.

Listen now to Business and the future of immigration in 2021.

A panel of independent experts from the world of business and immigration explain what the immigration system is and the practical steps you can take to adapt and use it.

Up-to-date guidance on the EU Settlement Scheme and right to work checks is available.

You can also listen on Apple and Spotify.

Download a full transcript of the podcast.



        
      

      
    Published 9 April 2020
    Last updated 20 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 October 2021
              Updated 'the UK's points-based immigration system: an introduction for employers' with changes to visas and entry requirements and latest right to work guidance.
            
            
              6 August 2021
              Updated information on EU citizens living in the UK by 31 December 2020 and applications made to the EU Settlement Scheme from 1 July 2021 in 'The UK's points-based immigration system: an introduction for employers'. Also added a link to the right to work check video.
            
            
              20 July 2021
              Removed 'An introduction for employers (accessible version) and 'An introduction for employers' documents.

Added 'The UK's points-based immigration system: an introduction for employers' document.
            
            
              4 January 2021
              Updated guides to reflect end of freedom of movement between the UK and EU. Added HTML version of 'Becoming a sponsor of skilled migrant workers'.
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Added podcast transcript: 'Business and the future of immigration in 2021'.
            
            
              19 November 2020
              Podcast on the future of immigration published.
            
            
              30 September 2020
              Added the employers guide to becoming a licensed sponsor of skilled migrant workers
            
            
              20 August 2020
              Updated the guidance to reflect changes to the system, and added videos.
            
            
              5 June 2020
              Clarification added that EU refers to EU, EEA and Switzerland on this page.
            
            
              9 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Recruiting people from outside the UK
        Understanding your right to work in the UK: EU, EEA and Swiss citizens
        Skilled Worker visa: eligible salary if you're under 26, studying, training or in a postdoctoral role
        UK points-based immigration system: employers and EU citizens
        Skilled Worker visa: jobs that qualify for a PhD salary discount

  




      

    Collection

  


        UK points-based immigration system: employers and EU citizens
        The arts, culture and heritage sectors and the EU
        The creative industries sector and the EU

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Foreign nationals working in the UK
        Visa sponsorship

  


  

  


    
  


    