

The RAND Blog
Previous Blog PostThe Justice System and the COVID-19 Pandemic: Resources for PolicymakersNext Blog PostThe Great Reset: Policing in 2030

Inventions Birthed by Necessity of Coronavirus
commentary
(Domestic Preparedness Journal)
Photo by ipopba/Getty Images



by Daniel M. Gerstein
April 20, 2020


If necessity is the mother of invention, the new coronavirus is quickly birthing a lot of innovations. Parts of U.S. society may be forever changed by this pandemic. As of April 13, 2020, the United States had over 550,000 confirmed cases and nearly 22,000 deaths, with emergency preparedness and response agencies preparing for much more to come. Combinations of social distancing, home quarantine, closure of schools and universities, and case isolation are now being extensively practiced. Creativity is being implemented each day to overcome response barriers to those at work and meet the needs of those asked to stay at home.
Although it is unclear how long current social distancing, quarantine, closure, and isolation measures will be required, most experts agree it will be months, if not longer. Laboratories around the world are working on developing a vaccine. However, mass production of vaccines and antivirals typically take 12-18 months. Limits on in-person interactions require new approaches to keep society functioning and the economy running. Companies have been quick to create workarounds to keep people virtually connected in a physically disconnected environment.…
The remainder of this commentary is available at domesticpreparedness.com.

Daniel M. Gerstein is a senior policy researcher at the RAND Corporation. He formerly served as the undersecretary (acting) and deputy undersecretary in the Science and Technology Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security from 2011-2014. Gerstein's latest book, The Story of Technology: How We Got Here and What the Future Holds, was published in October 2019.
This commentary originally appeared on Domestic Preparedness Journal on April 15, 2020. Commentary gives RAND researchers a platform to convey insights based on their professional expertise and often on their peer-reviewed research and analysis.

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn




Authors



Daniel M. Gerstein
@Daniel_Gerstein
Senior Policy Researcher






Topics
 Communication Technology
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Infrastructure
Pandemic
Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy
Transportation
United States



Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




 Related Resources 









Commentary
The COVID-19 Crisis Has Sparked Innovation and Offers Lessons We Must Not Forget

Apr 1, 2020
Sonja Marjanovic @SonjaCambs










Commentary
Implement Critical Care Surge Strategies Now to Save Lives

Apr 1, 2020
Mahshid Abir, Kaitlyn Entel, et al.










Project
Innovating for improved healthcare: the current context and ways forward for quality and productivity in the NHS

Jan 27, 2020








