
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Wireless communications, Networking and Information Theory Challenge
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA is seeking innovative technologies to deliver information exchange capabilities that are resilient in a highly dynamic operating environment.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      10 February 2021
      Last updated
      
        24 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Wireless communications, Networking and Information Theory Challenge
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: Wireless Communications, Networking and Information Theory
    
        PDF, 485KB, 9 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: Wireless Communications, Networking and Information Theory
    
        PDF, 335KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Wireless communications, Networking and Information Theory Q&A
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals for innovative technologies to deliver information exchange capabilities that are resilient in a highly dynamic operating environment where there are significant challenges from congestion and contention (e.g. jamming). The following areas are of interest:


  novel communication techniques
  novel coding and modulation
  novel networking techniques


We are interested in innovations that will reach Technology Readiness Levels (TRL) of between 3 and 6, at the end of the Phase 1 competition.

£500k is available for this Phase 1 DASA competition. There is no upper-limit per proposal for this competition, but we are expecting to fund around 5 to 10 proposals.

The competition closes for submissions at midday BST on Wednesday 7 April 2021.


Suppliers must complete the Supplier Assurance Questionnaire (SAQ) prior to competition close at midday BST on Wednesday 7 April 2021. You can do this by registering and logging onto the Supplier Cyber Protection Portal. When prompted during the SAQ, please enter the Risk Assessment Reference (RAR) number for this competition: RAR-GPGK52DP.

You must enter the SAQ reference number within the DASA submission service portal when you submit your proposal. If your SAQ suggests you are non-compliant this does not prevent you submitting a proposal; please still enter your SAQ number in your proposal and if you are successful in the competition and awarded funding, you will be required to complete a Cyber Implementation Plan (CIP) to become compliant which we will agree with you, before the contract is placed.




        
      

      
    Published 10 February 2021
    Last updated 24 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 March 2021
              A reminder to complete the supplier assurance questionnaire prior to competition close has been added.
            
            
              10 March 2021
              Wireless communications, Networking and Information Theory questions and answers now available
            
            
              10 February 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence and Security Accelerator funded contracts
        Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) Open Call for Innovation
        Market Exploration: Supercharging MOD’s Power Quality Management
        CDE themed competition: autonomy and big data for defence

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Armed forces
        Research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    