Washington D.C. – The Finals of the Department of Energy (DOE) National Science Bowl, that were to take place in early May in Washington, D.C., have moved to a virtual competition. The winners of regional events held earlier this year across the country - 41 middle school teams – have been engaged in an academic competition that will culminate in the crowning of the new National Champion on June 5, 2020.“I am excited and proud to announce the first-ever virtual National Science Bowl® Finals,” said DOE’s Office of Science Director, Dr. Chris Fall. “This challenging and competitive event calls on the most practiced and brightest students to showcase their skills in an array of areas. We will call on these students in future years to be the innovators and leaders that drive science.”During the academic competition, in which all 41 teams competed virtually over the past few weeks, teams of middle school students participated in a fast-paced question-and-answer competition, being tested on a range of science disciplines including biology, chemistry, Earth science, physics, energy and math. The top 32 teams will now compete for the National Championship on Friday, June 5. The field will be narrowed by the top scores in each consecutive round and the winning teams will be announced that night. The teams’ performances in the academic rounds of competition will be the primary determinant of their standings.The top two teams will receive $2,500 to take back to their schools to support their science departments.The top 4 teams will receive $2,000, the top 8 teams will receive $1,500, and the top 16 teams will take home $1,000 for their schools’ science departments.Approximately 325,000 students have participated in the National Science Bowl since DOE created it in 1991. DOE’s Office of Science manages the National Science Bowl and sponsors the Finals competition.For more information about the National Science Bowl, please visit . After a preliminary elimination round, these middle school teams are competing June 5:Alabama School of Fine Arts (Middle School), Birmingham, Ala.BASIS Peoria (Middle School), Peoria, Ariz.Granite Ridge Intermediate School, Fresno, Calif.Suzanne Middle School, Walnut, Calif.The Harker School (Middle School), San Jose, Calif.Winston Churchill Middle School, Carmichael, Calif.Preston Middle School, Fort Collins, Colo.East Lyme Middle School, Niantic, Conn.Stallings Island Middle School, Martinez, Ga.Daniel Wright Junior High School (Middle School), Lincolnshire, Ill.Sycamore School (Middle School), Indianapolis, Ind.Ames Middle School, Ames, IowaLone Oak Middle School, Paducah, Ky.Burleigh Manor Middle School, Ellicott City, Md.Jonas Clarke Middle School, Lexington, Mass.Wayzata Central Middle School, Plymouth, Minn.Ladue Middle School, St. Louis, Mo.King Science and Technical Magnet Middle School, Omaha, Neb.Princeton Charter School (Middle School), Princeton, N.J.Los Alamos Middle School, Los Alamos, N.M.Acadia Middle School, Clifton Park, N.Y.Great Neck South Middle School, Great Neck, N.Y.Stoller Middle School, Portland, Ore.Marshall Middle School, Wexford, Pa.Farragut Middle School, Knoxville, Tenn.BASIS San Antonio Shavano (Middle School), San Antonio, TexasCanyon Vista Middle School, Austin, TexasHutchinson Middle School, Lubbock, TexasLongfellow Middle School, Falls Church, Va.Lincoln Middle School, Pullman, Wash.Suncrest Middle School, Morgantown, W.Va.Wisconsin Hills Middle School, Brookfield, Wis.