

RAND Center to Advance Racial Equity Policy ProgramsThe center is working to support the next generation of policy leaders through programs engaging researchers, staff, and graduate students at RAND and our partner organizations in racial equity studies. To get in touch about any of the programs, contact us at racialequity@rand.org.Affiliates and Ambassadors Programs
Through this RAND staff program, center staff affiliates have an opportunity to learn and explore, and take part in collaborative research and programming with stakeholders from across the organization. Support for affiliates is provided through center resources. Once the affiliate appointment is complete, affiliates may move into an ambassadors group, where they will share their work with other stakeholders, and serve as peer reviewers or mentors for future RAND cohorts.Affiliates Cohort 1: October 2021–March 2022
Evan Banks
Adding a Racial Equity Lens to the RAND Guide to Selecting Diverse, Equitable, and Inclusive Imagery
Jason Etchegaray
Engaging Stakeholders to Understand and Prepare for Future Work and Future Technology in the Home Care Setting—An NSF Application
Melissa Finucane
Identifying and Communicating Best Practices for Racial Equity Performance Assessment of Federal Programs
Marielena Lara
Advancing Racial Equity in the Era of Intensifying Natural Disasters
Jessica Paige
Comparing the Trajectories of Continuing-Generation African American and White College Graduates
Nabeel Qureshi
Understanding and Addressing Racial Equity Differences in Quality of Care for Depression Treatment in Primary Care
Fellows Program
Interested graduate students and external researchers at partner organizations can apply to work with the Center to Advance Racial Equity Policy on developing solutions to today's racial equity public policy challenges, resources permitting. Fellows gain practical research experience in areas such as diversity, equity, education, and inclusion.Summer 2021 Fellow
Pierrce Holmes, of Springfield, Massachusetts, is the inaugural fellow at the RAND Center to Advance Racial Equity Policy and a second-year master of public policy student in the Heller School at Brandeis University. At RAND, Holmes worked closely with researchers Jonathan Welburn and Kathryn Edwards to explore policy models and context for federal reparations to Black Americans. His work included a forthcoming commentary and policy memo on the George Floyd Act. Holmes was supported through the Segal Fellowship via Brandeis.
Fall 2021 Health Equity Fellow
Mahshid Abir, of Ann Arbor, Michigan, is a visiting fellow at the center. She is an emergency physician at the University of Michigan and senior physician policy researcher at RAND. Her work with the center includes moderating a deliberative discussion with RAND staff on diversity, equity, and inclusion, and development of the Center's Health System–Community Pipeline Program (HCPP). Her work includes a forthcoming commentary and report on HCPP.
Research Associates Program
Research associate internships are developed based on shared interest and need, and will involve interdisciplinary work in research, design, moderation, and reporting of racial equity. Research associates will collaborate with the center and partnering organizations to engage in diversity, equity, and inclusion-centered trainings, contribute to data analysis, and write reports, white papers, and commentaries.
Fall 2021 Wabash Democracy Fellows and RAND Research Associates
In 2021-2022, the center is partnering with the Wabash Democracy and Public Discourse (WDPD) initiative to host a series of events and deliberative conversations.Davionne Garrett, Senior Democracy Fellow, of Michigan City, Indiana, is a current senior at Wabash College where he majors in economics and minors in political science. He is the current vice president of the student body at Wabash, where he utilizes his position to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion across campus. He is also an active member of the Malcolm X Institute of Black Studies, which he utilizes in combination with WDPD and his position as vice president to bring various groups on campus together to create connections and promote understanding of different perspectives and experiences.
Chase Breaux, Democracy Fellow, of Houston, Texas, is majoring in political science with a minor Black studies. At Wabash, Breaux serves in various positions—such as alumni committee chairman for the Malcolm X Institute of Black Studies, vice chairman for the Diversity and Inclusion Committee, and staff writer for the college’s student-run newspaper, The Bachelor—to contribute to a safer and more inclusive atmosphere on and off-campus.
Adam Brookman, Democracy Fellow, of Evansville, Indiana, is a junior German and history double major with a minor in political science. With WDPD, Brookman has worked on many projects with various topics. He has worked on projects involving housing development, diversity and inclusion, and gun violence. This summer, Brookman worked on a gun violence project in Evansville, Indiana, and created a comprehensive crime report on the issue.
Jonathan Silva, Democracy Fellow, of Calumet City, Illinois, is a politics, philosophy, and economics major. At Wabash College he is an advocate for the Hispanic voice to be active, and is the president of the Hispanic organization La Alianza: Unidos por Sangre. He is also a member of the Diversity and Inclusion Committee on campus and created a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion committee in his fraternity. As a WDPD Democracy Fellow he researches, collaborates, and facilitates conversation about race, diversity, and free speech.
Dr. Sara Drury is an associate professor and Chair of Rhetoric, and, since 2014, serves as the Director of Wabash Democracy and Public Discourse. Drury’s research and practice focus on the intersections of rhetoric and deliberative democracy, with particular attention to deliberative pedagogy, argumentation, and political communication. Her focus on fostering democracy through productive communication has led to projects with Indiana Humanities, the National Science Foundation, and the Kettering Foundation. Drury has been a Visiting Research Fellow at the University of Edinburgh’s Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities (2017-2018) and an Indiana Humanities Action Fellow (2019-2021). She received her B.A. summa cum laude from Boston College, and her M.A. and Ph.D. from the Pennsylvania State University.
Fall 2021 SPEC Research Associates
In 2021-2022, the center is partnering with the Sustainable Progress & Equality Collective (SPEC) to select Research Associates to assist in a unique, year-long project contributing to SPEC’s research and development projects and community building initiatives.Ilia de Leon, of Queens, New York, is a research associate with a focus in user experience design. She has a bachelor's degree in Information Science and Policy from the University at Albany. Ilia has spent many years working with companies overseas collaborating on various sourcing, production and logistics projects. More recently, Ilia has been focused on researching, understanding, and empathizing with users on their journey through digital products to create better experiences with usability, accessibility and inclusiveness in mind.
Lu Daley is a research associate/software developer at SPEC. Lu's research involves researching, creating, and testing full-stack solutions with accessibility in mind. His team is currently building a front-end design system, a full-stack learning management system, and contributing to other open source social justice, economic growth, and environmental sustainability projects.


Subscribe to our newsletter, Forward

Email

Sign up




