
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Guidance for Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) facilities in relation to coronavirus (COVID-19)
  

  
  
  
      
  The UK Good Laboratory Practice Monitoring Authority (UK GLPMA) recognises that there are potential challenges COVID-19 will present to members of the GLP monitoring programme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency

      
      Published
      30 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        11 August 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Office Based GLP Inspections

        
        
          Amendments and deviations

        
        
          Quality Assurance (QA)

        
        
          Communication of significant issues

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Office Based GLP Inspections

If an office based inspection of your facility is conducted, once the inspection is closed a statement of compliance will be issued to provide your facility with a record of continued membership of the monitoring programme.

An on-site facility inspection will then be scheduled once the regular inspection programme resumes.

Amendments and deviations

It is important that compliance with the principles of GLP continues to be maintained.

Any issues encountered due to COVID-19 that could potentially impact the GLP status of a study should be managed, fully assessed and documented via existing amendment and deviation procedures.

Quality Assurance (QA)

Maintaining an adequate QA programme is essential and it is recommended that QA activities are prioritised using a risk based approach. A risk assessment can be used to identify where to focus resource and adapt audit programmes.

If planned QA audits cannot be conducted or are delayed due to lack of available resource or travel restrictions, the impact this has on the study should be assessed and documented by the study director.

The use of remote technology such as video calls as an alternative to physical presence would be considered acceptable provided there is enough detail within study records to reconstruct activities and that the method of observation can be identified. The use of remote observation methods should be fully risk-assessed to ensure they provide a similar level of oversight as a physical audit.

We recommend you consult the MHRA guidance for GLP facilities on implementing and maintaining a risk-based quality assurance programme, which provides information on possible approaches for QA programmes.

Communication of significant issues

The GLPMA should be informed, via email, of any significant changes that happen with regard to the premises, activities or management of a Test Facility to  gxplabs@mhra.gov.uk.

MHRA guidance on coronavirus (COVID-19).





      
        
    Published 30 March 2020
    Last updated 11 August 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 August 2020
              Added a link to new guidance on resuming inspections.
            
            
              30 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Good laboratory practice (GLP) facilities: risk-based quality assurance
        Good laboratory practice (GLP) for safety tests on chemicals
        Approval of GxP documents when working from home during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak
        Guidance on GxP data integrity
        Information for hospital blood banks during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak

  




      

    Collection

  


        MHRA guidance on coronavirus (COVID-19)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Good practice, inspections and enforcement

  


  

  


    
  


    