If the pandemic has taught us anything, it’s that there is no “stop” button for change. Take the , for example. Employees are quitting at  and cite a lack of connection to the organization as a primary reason. Many feel increased burnout, , and exhaustion. Employees also report wanting to feel valued and treated as an individual, yet organizations are relying on transactional strategies to retain them.  Organizations must address this employee need for connection and well-being. One approach is building , the ability to learn flexibly and efficiently and to apply that knowledge across situations. Being adaptable boosts well-being, turns adversity into a , and helps create an environment where relationships can thrive. Adaptability operates and drives results at four distinct levels:Building adaptability begins with leaders dealing with change gracefully, despite the tendency to default to fear or familiar solutions. Leaders must bolster their own well-being and transform their relationship with change by building adaptability as an .Our Great Attrition research suggests that employees are prioritizing relational aspects while leadership is focused on transactional elements. One solution to this dissonance is having key influencers across the organization—with more direct team impact—model adaptability. During large-scale change initiatives, reach and consistency of the change story impact the speed at which employees adopt and sustain new adaptable behaviors.Additionally, personalizing a skill-building program to reflect employee developmental areas and broader skill gaps can boost effectiveness. Outside of capability building, other aspects—such as re-benchmarking compensation, reevaluating the operating model, and deploying formal employee-listening strategies—should happen simultaneously to reinforce new behaviors.Adaptability holds the key to equipping the workforce with skills to boost well-being and enrich relationships—turning the primary drivers of the Great Attrition into primary opportunities.***