
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Fruit Propagation Certification Scheme
  

  
  
  
      
  How commercial plant growers can grow FPCS-certified stock, and find out the benefits of using it in commercial plantations.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Animal and Plant Health Agency

      
      Published
      30 January 2017
      Last updated
      
        13 May 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Apply for FPCS certification

        
        
          Inspections

        
        
          Certification

        
        
          Fees

        
        
          Grading system

        
        
          Hops certification

        
        
          
CAC grade

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Fruit Propagation Certification Scheme (FPCS) encourages the production and use of healthy planting stock. You must join the FCPS if you want to sell certified plants to a commercial grower (‘propagator’).

You can apply to join the FPCS to grow proven healthy stock if you’re a commercial grower of:


  soft fruit – Fragaria, Rubus, Ribes and Vaccinium
  top fruit – Malus, Pyrus, Prunus and Cydonia
  rootstocks and ornamental varieties associated with top fruit
  micropropagated material of any of the above crops


Contact the Plant Health and Seeds Inspectorate (PHSI) for information on other species.

Apply for FPCS certification

The UK has a UK certification scheme based on the current rules for marketing plants within the UK.

Export of fruit propagating material to the EU isn’t possible until the UK government and devolved administrations have made bi-lateral agreements with individual EU member states.

EU fruit propagating material continues to be marketable in GB under EU labelling requirements, provided the material can be traced to a UK address.

If the species previously required an EU plant passport to be imported from the EU to the UK, a phytosanitary certificate will now be required. Certified plants can be entered in FPCS if they meet the specific conditions.

Any grower in England and Wales can apply to have their crops certified under the FPCS. Your crops must be of known lineage unless you’re entering it at Conformitas Agraria Communitatis (CAC) grade.

All material must be grown under specific conditions relating to their site and isolation from other crops as explained in these guides:


  general information guide for all crop categories (PDF, 154KB, 6 pages)
  micropropagation (PDF, 189KB, 6 pages)
  registration of suppliers (PDF, 105KB, 2 pages)
  varietal identity of fruit plant material (PDF, 162KB, 4 pages)
  labelling and sealing (PDF, 137KB, 4 pages)
  black currants, red currants, white currants and gooseberries (Ribes) (PDF, 259KB, 13 pages)
  blueberries (Vaccinium) (PDF, 200KB, 10 pages)
  raspberries (Rubus) (PDF, 229KB, 13 pages)
  strawberries (Fragaria) (PDF, 277KB, 15 pages)
  top fruit-complete trees (Cydonia, Malus, Prunus, Pyrus) (PDF, 188KB, 7 pages)
  top fruit-mother trees (Cydonia, Malus, Prunus, Pyrus) (PDF, 199KB, 10 pages)
  top fruit-rootstocks (Cydonia, Malus, Prunus, Pyrus) (PDF, 201KB, 11 pages)


Use the Nuclear Stock Association’s application forms to enter stocks into FPCS.

If you’re entering planting material only for the CAC grade you must register with Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) to issue plant passports. Apply through PHSI.

Inspections

APHA Plant Health and Seeds Inspectors (PHSI) inspect crops at least once a year to check they meet the standards set out in the guides.

Assessments are normally made on the basis of visual examinations, but samples may be taken for laboratory analysis to get a definitive diagnosis.

If a stock fails an inspection, PHSI may tell the the propagator they can remove plants that do not meet the scheme standards and request an additional inspection.

Certification
If the crop meets all the conditions set out in the guides, they’ll get FPCS certification. Certification details are published in the FPCS annual register.

Fees
You’ll pay fees for all crop inspections relating to certifications. Any samples submitted to support inspections will be handled by Fera Science who will invoice you.

Grading system
You can enter your crop to meet one of these grades:


  pre-basic
  basic
  certified


Crops which cannot meet the entry requirements for any FPCS grades are designated CAC, which means that they meet simpler standards.

Hops certification

You can apply for hops certification under the voluntary Plant Health Propagation Scheme (PHPS) (PDF, 185KB, 12 pages). Planting material must be grown under specific conditions relating to site and isolation from other crops as set out in this guide.

Hops fees

You’ll pay fees for all crop inspections relating to certifications. Any samples submitted to support inspections will be handled by Fera Science who will invoice you.


CAC grade

CAC is the minimum category for sale of fruit plant material.

The Marketing of Fruit Plant Material Regulations 2017 and the Marketing of Fruit Plant and Propagating Material (Wales) 2017 apply to fruit plants and propagating material including rootstocks of these genera and species:


  almond (Prunus amygdalus Batsch)
  apple (Malus)
  apricot (Prunus armeniaca)
  chestnut (Castanea sativa Mill.)
  black, red and white currant, gooseberry (Ribes)
  blackberry, raspberry and hybrid berries (Rubus)
  blueberry, cranberry and bilberry (Vaccinium)
  common edible fig (Ficus carica)
  grapefruit, lemon, lime, mandarin, orange (Citrus)
  hazel (Corylus avellana)
  Japanese plum (Prunus salicina Lindley)
  kumquat (Fortunella Swingle)
  olive (Olea europaea)
  peach (Prunus persica Batsch)
  all cultivated edible pears, including perry pears (Pyrus)
  pistachio (Pistacia vera)
  plum (Prunus domestica)
  quince (Cydonia oblonga Mill.)
  sour cherry (Prunus cerasus)
  all cultivated strawberry species (Fragaria)
  sweet cherry (Prunus avium)
  trifoliate orange (Poncirus Raf.)
  walnut (Juglans regia)



CAC exemptions

You do not have to follow the regulations if you’re:


  exporting plant material to buyers in non-EU countries
  a small producer and all of your production is for sale or growing in the local market


Register as a grower

You must register with APHA to sell CAC grade produce. Registration is free. Contact PHSI about which varieties you can market.

Quality and health requirements

CAC material must be practically free from certain pests and diseases (PDF, 129KB, 7 pages) as appropriate to the genus or species. Contact PHSI about genera not explained in this guide.

The supplier is responsible for carrying out visual inspections and sampling and testing of CAC material.

CAC material must also be practically free from defects such as injuries, discolouration, scar tissue and desiccation.

If the CAC material no longer applies with the standards the supplier must:


  remove the material from the vicinity of other CAC material
  take measures, such as removing diseased or injured plants, to ensure the material is practically free from defects


Supplier document

You can only market CAC material if it has a ‘supplier document’, which is any document or label produced by the supplier with the following information:


  ‘UK quality’
  ‘CAC material UK’ to indicate the plants were grown in, or imported into, the UK
  ‘EW’, the code for England and Wales
  registration number of supplier
  name of supplier
  individual serial, week or batch number
  date of issue of document
  botanical name of the plants, such as fragaria or rubus
  variety name, or for rootstocks, a designation if there is no variety name
  the name of the variety of the rootstock and of the top-graft for grafted fruit plants
  quantity of the plant material


The plant passport and supplier’s document can be joint or separate. When a joint label or document is used, the plant passport must be distinct from other information on that label or document (for example in a separate outlined box).

These genera must have official plant passporting inspections for certain quarantine organisms, and the words ‘EC plant passport’ on their supplier document:


  Fragaria
  Malus
  Prunus
  Pyrus
  Rubus


Keep records

You must keep at least 3 years’ records for CAC material of:


  sales and purchases of plant material
  the composition and origin of plant material of different origins mixed by the supplier during packaging, storage or transport
  what plant material is under production on site
  any pests and diseases and measures taken for control






      
        
    Published 30 January 2017
    Last updated 13 May 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 May 2021
              Updated the certification scheme fruit plants guides and the hops certification guide.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              Updated with guidance on how to comply with rules from 1 January.
            
            
              7 February 2019
              Plant Health propagation scheme (PHPS) and Pests and Diseases document updated.
            
            
              23 January 2018
              Updated FPCS certification guides (top fruit-complete trees; blueberries (Vaccinium); raspberries (Rubus); black currants, red currants, white currants and gooseberries) and Hops certification leaflet.
            
            
              27 December 2017
              Updated FPCS certification guides, CAC pests and diseases table and Hops certification leaflet.
            
            
              15 May 2017
              Updated document: raspberries (Rubus) FPCS certification
            
            
              31 January 2017
              Updated attached EU certification guides to raspberries (Rubus) and strawberries (Fragaria).
            
            
              30 January 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Plant health and seeds control inspection
        PHI 10: application for authority to send authorised materials
        Report a tree pest or disease: overview
        Seed imports over 2kg from Third Countries
        Crop inspections: instructions

  




      

    Collection

  


        Guides and forms for plant varieties and seeds applications

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crops and horticulture 

  


  

  


    
  


    