
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Digital and agile bitesize basics: short online modules
  

  
  
  
      
  A selection of 10 online modules introducing digital and agile for anyone working in the public sector.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Digital, Data and Technology Profession

      
      Published
      23 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        13 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Course summary

        
        
          Module aims and objectives

        
        
          Eligibility

        
        
          Cost

        
        
          Course dates

        
        
          Book a place

        
        
          Cancellation

        
        
          Contact GDS Academy

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Course summary

These live, interactive online learning modules  are mapped to the Service Standard and introduce what’s involved in creating user-centred, modern, digital public services. There are also modules on how to make effective use of agile methods.

All modules are typically delivered via Zoom. If you’re happy to do so, you are welcome to use a personal device to join; all content is unclassified and there is no requirement to download any software or information.

Module aims and objectives

A series of interactive online modules to introduce you to the service standard and the foundations of how we design and deliver digital services in the public sector.

The Service Standard

Understand what the Service Standard is and how it supports the creation of joined-up, trusted services, responsive to user needs.

Learn the 14 points that make up the Service Standard, how they are grouped and why.

Agile delivery phases

Learn what discovery, alpha, private beta, public beta and live mean and why government uses them for public services.

Identify what happens during each phase, including when service assessments happen.

Multi-disciplinary teams and the Digital, Data and Technology (DDaT) framework

Understand why services must have multi-disciplinary teams.

Get to know the DDaT Profession Capability Framework and what the digital roles in government are.

See examples of public sector multi-disciplinary teams working on services and understand what each role does.

Understand how this works in your own organisation.

Understanding users and their needs

Understand the importance of users and their needs when developing services.

Learn about how user research works, including using different research methods for different purposes.

Understand how bias and assumptions affect the design process and how to reduce them.

Digital accessibility

Understand what digital accessibility is and why it is so important when creating public services. Learn about the different types of accessibility needs people have.

Learn about how accessibility laws affect public services and what the requirements are.

Discover where to go to find out more about making services that work for everyone.

Introduction to agile

Gain an overview of agile, what it is and why the Service Standard recommends using agile ways of working when creating public services.

Learn about the agile values and principles that support service development.

Scrum

Learn about the Scrum framework, including Scrum events like standup, planning, retro and show and tell.

Learn what roles exist in a Scrum team, like the product owner and scrum master.

User stories

Learn about user stories and how teams make use of them to focus on user needs. Understand why they are an important tool for helping teams prioritise work and deliver the most valuable improvements to users quicker.

Identity in government

This module helps you understand what digital identity in the UK is and how it allows users to access digital services safely.

Find out how identity standards are an essential part of preventing identity fraud.

Discover GPG 45: the government’s good practice guide on how to prove and verify someone’s identity.

Measuring performance

Understand how a performance analyst helps teams:


  define what a successful service is
  collect the right data
  publish data as appropriate


Understand the differences between qualitative and quantitative data.

Eligibility

Our courses are available to civil servants, local government employees, devolved administrations and other public servants.

Cost

The course costs £860 plus VAT per person. You need to include a purchase order number when you sign up.

Course dates


  
    
      Date
      Availability
    
  
  
    
      14 to 16 February
      Places available
    
    
      01 to 03 March
      Places available
    
    
      21 to 23 March
      Places available
    
  


We are trialling a new delivery format for this course which, if successful, will allow us to deliver them more often. The new format is as follows - 
 


  Days 1 and 2 - 09:30 to 16:30, four 1 hour modules, including breaks and lunch
  Day 3  - 09:30 to 12:30, two 1 hour modules, including breaks


Sign up for the GDS Academy newsletter so you get notified about new course dates.

Book a place


You need a purchase order number before you can book a course.


To book a place, email gds.academy@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk, with the following information:


  name
  organisation
  email address
  the course date you would like to attend, from those available
  purchase order number
  postal address for your finance department to quote on the invoice
  an email contact for the invoice to be sent to, once raised


Tell us how many trainees there will be

You can book for one person or a group of people.

If you want to book for a group, you can choose:


  an open group (people from other organisations can join the training)
  a closed group (this is only for you and people you invite)


Cancellation

Cancellation within 10 working days of a course being due to start will result in still being charged in full. Cancellations outside of 10 working days will not incur a charge. Exceptions apply. Please contact us to discuss as soon as you think you may need to cancel.

Contact GDS Academy

Email GDS Academy: gds.academy@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk.




      
        
    Published 23 October 2020
    Last updated 13 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 December 2021
              New dates added
            
            
              5 November 2021
              Change to available dates
            
            
              3 November 2021
              Update to available dates
            
            
              5 October 2021
              New dates added
            
            
              4 August 2021
              New dates added
            
            
              8 July 2021
              Change to available dates
            
            
              2 June 2021
              New date added
            
            
              21 May 2021
              New dates added
            
            
              6 May 2021
              Cancellation policy added
            
            
              17 March 2021
              Change to cost and available dates
            
            
              10 March 2021
              Update to course summary. Info re. Zoom/personal devices
            
            
              15 December 2020
              Change to available dates
            
            
              2 November 2020
              Dates published
            
            
              23 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Service owner course
        Digital and agile foundation course
        Working level for product managers course
        GDS Academy courses
        Digital leadership course

  




      

    Collection

  


        GDS Academy courses

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    