
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Arable and horticultural land standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out about the standard for arable and horticultural land, who’s eligible and how much you can get paid.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      7 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        7 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How the standard works

        
        
          How much you’ll be paid

        
        
          What land is eligible

        
        
          Introductory level: actions

        
        
          Intermediate level: actions

        
        
          Advanced level: actions

        
        
          Further advice and information

        
        
          Funding for capital items

        
        
          Monitoring and support

        
        
          Additional standards you can apply to this land

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This information is for farmers piloting the Sustainable Farming Incentive.

How the standard works

There are 3 levels to the standard. Each level has a set of actions you must complete, where relevant, to get paid.

The levels build on one another - each one includes the actions from the previous levels.


If you’re already doing activities on your land that fulfil the actions in this standard, you can use these areas instead of creating new ones. This means you can maintain existing areas to complete actions that require you to ‘create’ or ‘establish’ something.


Anything you’re doing to complete an action only counts towards that action. It will not count towards the standard’s other actions, unless this guidance says otherwise.

When to complete actions

Because agreements will start from November 2021 at the earliest, it will be too late to complete some actions that must take place after harvest - for example, establishing a green cover by the end of September or mid-October.

Complete these actions within 12 months of your agreement start date. This means you can complete the post-harvest actions after harvest 2022.

Actions that need you to create a new habitat may not be practical during the winter months - for example, sowing a winter bird food mix. You should complete these actions within 12 months of your agreement start date.

How much you’ll be paid

The levels and payments for the arable and horticultural land standard are set out in the table.

These payment rates are annual.


  
    
      Level
      Payment per hectare
    
  
  
    
      Introductory
      £28
    
    
      Intermediate
      £54
    
    
      Advanced
      £74
    
  


You’ll be paid for all the eligible land that’s in your agreement and you’ll have to complete the actions on all that land.

Some actions affect a smaller percentage of this land – for example, providing resources for birds and pollinators on 5% of eligible land. You’re still paid for all the eligible land in your agreement, not just the 5%.

You can apply for funding for capital items.

What land is eligible

You can use the standard for all cultivated arable land, including:


  horticultural crops, such as field vegetables
  temporary grassland – that is, land that has been in grass or other herbaceous forage for 5 years or less


You can also include non-agricultural areas on cultivated arable land, such as:


  scrub
  tall vegetation
  wet features that do not cover the majority of the total land parcel area


Ineligible land

Do not use this standard for peat soil areas, greater than 20% soil organic matter to a depth of 40cm or more.

Changes to the land because you’re completing actions

The land must be eligible at the start date of your agreement.

Changes to the land’s use, composition or cover that happen because you’re completing the actions in this standard do not affect eligibility, and you’ll continue to be paid under this standard, at your chosen ambition level.

Measuring areas for actions where there are hedgerows or water bodies

Some actions must be fulfilled on a percentage of the eligible land entered into the standard. For example, having a mix of herbs, legumes and grass on 5% of eligible land.

If you’ve entered the same land into the hedgerows standard or water body buffering standard, the percentage area for an action to be fulfilled under another standard cannot overlap with the hedgerow or water body buffer strips. Measure the percentage area from the edge of these buffer strips. If this is not the case, measure from the edge of the hedgerow or water body.


The area can include the 2-metre or 1-metre cross-compliance buffers required under GAEC 1, and the 2-metre green cover requirement under GAEC 7a, where relevant.


Sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs)

If your application includes SSSI land, you will need consent from Natural England.

Make your request for consent when you get your agreement offer. Send a copy of the offer along with a notice form to:

ProtectedSites@naturalengland.org.uk

Your agreement cannot start without SSSI consent.

For more information read the guidance sites of special scientific interest: managing your land.

Introductory level: actions

You must do the following actions to be paid £28 per hectare.

Read the section of this guide about evidence you should keep.

1. Provide resources for birds and pollinators on 5% of eligible land

On at least 5% of eligible land entered into the standard, you must provide year-round resources for farmland birds, pollinators and other beneficial insects.

You must have:


  sites for nesting and cover on 1% of eligible land entered into the standard
  habitats rich in insects and flowers on 2% of eligible land entered into the standard
  sown winter seed on 2% of eligible land entered into the standard


Bird boxes do not count towards the total percentage.

As an alternative to the sown winter seed, you can provide winter seed food with these activities over a larger area of land:


  sow brassica fodder crops on 5% of land
  keep enhanced over-winter stubble until 31 July of the following year on 5% of land
  keep basic over-winter stubble on 10% of land
  keep whole crop cereal as over winter stubble on 10% of land


You cannot combine these alternatives.

Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on providing resources for birds and pollinators

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to provide nesting and cover:


  create areas of bare ground for invertebrates
  provide nest boxes for birds
  install wildlife boxes for species at risk
  create nesting plots for lapwing and stone curlew
  create and maintain grass strips
  create and maintain field corners
  use harvested low input cereal
  create and maintain herbal leys
  use unharvested low input cereal


You can also read information on how to create insect and flower rich habitat:


  create and maintain flower-rich margins and plots
  create areas of bare ground for invertebrates
  create and maintain pollen and nectar plots
  create 2 year sown legume fallow
  create and maintain wildlife plots
  create cultivated margins and plots for arable plants
  create and maintain beetle banks
  use harvested low input cereal
  create and maintain herbal leys
  use unharvested low input cereal


You can also read information on how to sow winter seed:


  sow winter bird food plots in spring
  sow winter bird food plots in autumn
  leave stubbles over winter
  provide ryegrass seed-set for birds over winter
  use unharvested low input cereal



Hedgerow buffer strips that have been included in the hedgerows standard cannot be counted as contributing to this standard.


2. Create buffers around 50% of in-field trees

This action will protect your trees and provide a habitat for wildlife.

Maintain a 10 metre buffer around at least 50% of all in-field trees. The 10 metre buffer should be measured from the edge of the trunk.

Leave mature ivy, low hanging and fallen, dead or dying branches on the tree or beneath the canopy.

Do not cut the buffers or use them for the storage of machinery or materials.

You’ll get £10 per tree each year.


You cannot claim this payment if the land is conditionally exempt from Inheritance Tax (Heritage Property Relief).


Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on creating buffers around trees

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to maintain in-field trees.

3. Use a nutrient management plan

Use a nutrient management plan to ensure that your application of manures and fertilisers:


  meets crop and soil requirements
  minimises loss of nutrients and emissions of ammonia and greenhouse gases


Information on using a nutrient management plan

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to create and use a nutrient management plan

4. Use low emission technologies

This action will cut down ammonia emissions.

You must do at least one of the following:


  use low emission technologies, for example trailing hose, shoe or shallow injection or dribble bar, to apply organic manures (slurries and other organic liquid manures)
  where you’re due to cultivate land, incorporate any organic manures, composted manures, sewage sludge and slurry within 12 hours


Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on low emission technologies

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to use precision application of fertiliser, manure and other inputs

Intermediate level: actions

At the intermediate level you must do the actions in the introductory level, plus the 
following actions to be paid £54 per hectare.

Read the section of this guide about evidence you should keep.

1. Provide resources for birds and pollinators on 8% of eligible land

This action extends the introductory action to a larger percentage of your land.

On at least 8% of eligible land entered into the standard, you must provide year-round resources for farmland birds, pollinators and other beneficial insects.

You must have:


  sites for nesting and cover on 2% of eligible land entered into the standard
  habitats rich in insects and flowers on 3% of eligible land entered into the standard
  sown winter seed on 3% of eligible land entered into the standard (or a larger area of the alternative activities described in the introductory level)


Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

2. Support a wide range of farm wildlife

To support a range of farm wildlife, you should do one or more of the following:


  cultivate plots for arable plants and ground nesting birds
  create, manage and enhance beetle banks
  sow ungrazed legume fallows
  provide supplementary winter feed for birds


In total, you’ll need to cover whichever is larger:


  0.5 hectares
  0.5% of eligible land entered into the standard



This counts towards the 8% of land you need for the first action too.


If you provide supplementary winter feed for birds, 250kg is equivalent to 0.5 hectares.  This works best if you are also providing sown winter seed.

Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on supporting farm wildlife

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  create cultivated margins and plots for arable plants
  create and maintain beetle banks
  create nesting plots for lapwing and stone curlew
  create 2 year sown legume fallow
  provide supplementary winter food for birds


3. Complete a whole farm nutrient budget

This action will improve nutrient use efficiency and reduce nutrient losses to the environment.

Complete a whole farm nutrient budget that takes account of:


  inputs from feed, fertiliser and manures
  outputs in crop and livestock products


Use your budget to produce an action plan.

The whole farm nutrient budget should cover all your land parcels. It can be used for both the arable and grassland standards.

Required documents

You must keep your nutrient budget​​ documents for us to monitor. You do not need to send these to us unless we ask for them.

Information on whole farm nutrient budgets

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to use a whole farm nutrient budget.

4. Do soil mapping

This action will help you to:


  better target nutrient application
  use nutrients more efficiently
  minimise nutrient losses


Do detailed soil mapping to test nutrient variations within fields, for example P, K, Mg and pH, on either:


  25% of eligible land entered into the standard each year
  all the eligible land entered into the standard once every 4 years


Required documents

You must keep your soil mapping​​ documents for us to monitor. You do not need to send these to us unless we ask for them.

5. Manage ditches

This action will help to provide additional habitat for farm wildlife, including aquatic plants and invertebrates, fish and amphibians, water voles and flowering plants for pollinating insects.

Where you have ditches:


  manage your ditches between 1 September and 1 April
  cut no more than half the length of bank vegetation in any year
  carry out in-channel management on a rotation of 3 years or longer


Ditches include temporarily dry watercourses.


You can do in-channel management more regularly if you’ve been told to by a flood management authority.


This requirement only applies where the applicant has control over the management of the ditch. Ditches managed by the Environment Agency or an Internal Drainage Board are exempt.

Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on managing ditches

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to create and manage ditches for wildlife.

Advanced level: actions

For the advanced level you must do the actions in the introductory and intermediate levels, plus the following actions to be paid £74 per hectare.

Read the section of this guide about evidence you should keep.

1. Provide resources for birds and pollinators on 10% of eligible land

This extends the intermediate action to a larger percentage of your land.

On at least 10% of eligible land entered into the standard, you must provide year-round resources for farmland birds, pollinators and other beneficial insects.

You must have:


  sites for nesting and cover on 2% of eligible land entered into the standard
  habitats rich in insects and flowers on 4% of eligible land entered into the standard
  sown winter seed on 4% of eligible land entered into the standard (or a larger area of the alternative activities described in the introductory level)


Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

2. Create buffers around 75% of your in-field trees

This action will protect your trees and provide a habitat for wildlife.

Create 10 metre buffers around at least 75% of all in-field trees - this is up from 50% at the previous 2 levels.

Leave mature ivy, low hanging and fallen, dead or dying branches on the tree or beneath the canopy.

Do not cut the buffers or use them for the storage of machinery or materials.

You’ll get £10 per tree.


You cannot claim this payment if the land is conditionally exempt from Inheritance Tax (Heritage Property Relief).


Information on creating buffers around trees

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to maintain in-field trees.

Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

3. Maintain areas of tall vegetation, scrub and wet features

This action will provide nesting, food and shelter for wildlife.

Create or maintain areas of:


  tall vegetation
  scrub
  wet features, such as ponds


You must do this over 2% of eligible land entered into the standard. This must be in addition to any hedges, woods, scrub or tall vegetation managed under other standards.

Do not allow scrub to develop on historic sites.

Information on maintaining areas of tall vegetation, scrub and wet features

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  create scrub and scrub mosaics
  manage scrub and scrub mosaics
  create and maintain field corners
  create ponds and lakes
  maintain and enhance ponds and lakes


4. Support crop-pest predators

Locate areas that support crop-pest predators close to crops.

You must:


  provide at least one area in every cropped field 5 hectares or larger
  use these areas to subdivide fields larger than 20 hectares



This counts towards the 10% of land you need for the first action at the advanced level.


Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on supporting crop-pest predators

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  create and maintain flower-rich margins and plots
  create areas of bare ground for invertebrates
  create and maintain pollen and nectar plots
  create 2 year sown legume fallow
  create and maintain wildlife plots
  leave stubbles over winter
  create and maintain beetle banks
  use harvested low input cereal
  use unharvested low input cereal


5. Apply fertilisers and pesticides with precision equipment

This action will help target nutrient application.

Use efficient precision application equipment to apply fertilisers and pesticides.

Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

Information on applying fertilisers and pesticides with precision equipment

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  use precision application of fertiliser, manure and other inputs
  use precision pesticide application systems


Further advice and information

For further advice on doing the actions in this standard read the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot: summary of advice.

Read more about how this standard will meet the environmental outcomes and benefits of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot.

Funding for capital items

As a Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot participant you’ll be able to apply for funding for the following capital items:


  small wildlife box
  medium wildlife box
  large wildlife box


You’ll apply for these through the Countryside Stewardship Capital Grants scheme from early 2022. If you’re successful you’ll be offered a separate Countryside Stewardship Capital Grants agreement. To be eligible for this funding you must not start capital items work (or order materials) until your Countryside Stewardship Capital Grants agreement starts.

You may also be able to get funding from other programmes for precision fertilizer application equipment.

More information will be published before applications open.

Monitoring and support

The Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot will use a new model for monitoring agreements. It will focus on outcomes and improvement instead of penalties.

Once your agreement has started, we’ll use various techniques to see whether you’re achieving the aims of the standards.

Read more about:


  how the pilot will monitor agreements
  the aims of the standard


Additional standards you can apply to this land

Land parcels you use for this standard can also be used for the:


  arable and horticultural soils standard
  hedgerows standard
  water body buffering standard


If you apply more than one standard to the same land, the actions for each must be delivered separately.

If you also use the hedgerows standard:


  hedgerow buffer zones cannot be counted towards actions in the arable land standard
  you must prioritise hedgerows standard requirements over other standards in the buffer zone


Further information

See all the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance.




      
        
    Published 7 June 2021
    Last updated 7 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 October 2021
              Clarified information on waterbody and hedgerow area measurements.
Added information about evidence requirements.
            
            
              5 October 2021
              Updated information on funding for capital items.
            
            
              1 October 2021
              This adds guidance on measuring areas close to hedgerows and water bodies.
            
            
              22 September 2021
              Added a link to guidance on how to install wildlife boxes for species at risk.
            
            
              10 September 2021
              Changed the date of 'capital items' guidance publication to later this year.
            
            
              9 September 2021
              Changed agreement start date from October 2021 to November 2021 at the earliest.
            
            
              1 September 2021
              This update adds more detail to the section on land eligilibity.
It also clarifies that the alternative ways of supplying winter feed for birds cannot be combined - you must choose 1 way. 
Where percentages of land are mentioned, this update also makes it clearer that the land in question is 'eligible land entered into the standard'.
It adds a section on delaying actions that may be impractical to undertake immediately.
            
            
              23 August 2021
              This update clarifies how payments work, following user feedback. It explains that when an action covers only a percentage of eligible land in an agreement, you still receive payment for all eligible land in the agreement, not just that percentage. 
It also clarifies some other points: 

* that alternatives to sown winter feed are allowed at advanced level
* that birdboxes do not count towards the required percentage area of nesting sites
* that the low-emission technologies listed are just examples 
* that changes to the land because you're fulfilling your agreement do not affect eligibility

It also adds a line explaining that anything you're doing to complete an action only counts towards that action and not the others in the standard. 
It also clarifies how areas of land already meeting the standard can be included.
            
            
              6 August 2021
              This update clarifies small points about the application and incorporation of slurries in introductory action 4. It also updates the title to make it clearer that this standard is for the SFI pilot.
            
            
              5 August 2021
              Added a link to the collection of SFI guidance.
            
            
              6 July 2021
              Removed reference to 9 items from list of capital items that can be funded.
Added references to tree payment not being allowed for land conditionally exempt from Inheritance Tax.
            
            
              24 June 2021
              This update clarifies alternative ways of providing winter seed food and adds information about amount of supplementary winter feed needed as an equivalent to sown feed. 
It also removes some information about land that supports rare arable plants - this information is in the technical guidance that the page links to.
            
            
              18 June 2021
              A line saying 'You should keep evidence to show you’ve done these actions for inspections' has been removed from each level of actions. This did not give enough useful information and the evidence requirements are clearer in the linked monitoring guidance. Best practice examples will follow in an update to the SFI guidance.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot: summary of advice
        Low and no input grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Improved grassland soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance
        Arable and horticultural soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Arable and horticultural soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Farm woodland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Hedgerows standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Improved grassland soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Improved grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot

      
        
          + 6 more
        
      

      
        
          Low and no input grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Water body buffering standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Create and maintain flower-rich margins and plots, Aims of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot standards, and Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot: summary of advice
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Rural grants and payments

  


  

  


    
  


    