
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Exhaustion of IP rights and parallel trade
  

  
  
  
      
  Actions that parallel exporters to the EEA and intellectual property rights holders need to take. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Intellectual Property Office and Government Digital Service

      
      Published
      30 January 2020
      Last updated
      
        21 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Parallel exports from the UK to the EEA


        
        
          Actions for parallel exporters of IP-protected goods to the EEA


        
        
          Actions for IP rights holders

        
        
          Parallel imports from the EEA to the UK

        
        
          Consultation on the UK’s future exhaustion of IP rights regime

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guidance is for businesses trading in parallel goods in the European Economic Area (EEA) and owners of intellectual property rights.

Parallel trade is the import and export of genuine intellectual property (IP) protected goods. Parallel trade occurs when the intellectual property rights in those goods are ‘exhausted’. That is, they have been placed on the market within a specific territory by, or with the permission of, the rights holder. The exhaustion of IP rights means that IP rights cannot be used to stop the further distribution or resale of those goods.

Parallel exports from the UK to the EEA


Goods placed on the UK market by, or with the consent of, the right holder may no longer be considered exhausted in the EEA.

This means that businesses exporting these IP-protected goods from the UK to the EEA might need the right holder’s consent.

Actions for parallel exporters of IP-protected goods to the EEA


Check whether you export IP-protected goods to the EEA (for example, goods branded with a trade mark) that have already been placed on the UK market.

You may need to contact the rights holder to get permission to export those goods. The IP rights holder may not provide permission for their IP-protected goods to be parallel exported to the EEA.

You may need to review your business arrangements, business model or supply chain based on the outcome of the discussion with the IP rights holder.

Actions for IP rights holders

Businesses that own IP rights (for example, a trade mark) may wish to seek legal advice if their IP-protected goods are parallel exported from the UK to the EEA. You will need to consider if you want to allow parallel exports of your IP-protected goods from the UK to the EEA.

Parallel imports from the EEA to the UK

The IP rights in goods placed on the EEA market by, or with the consent of the right holder  continue to be considered exhausted in the UK. This means that parallel imports into the UK from the EEA are  unaffected.

Consultation on the UK’s future exhaustion of IP rights regime

The government has published a formal consultation to seek views on what the UK’s future exhaustion of IP rights regime should be.

The government is interested in responses from businesses, representative organisations, civil society organisations, legal practitioners and creators of new products, technology or creative works.

Please see the UK’s future exhaustion of intellectual property rights regime consultation for further information and how to respond. The consultation closes at 11:45pm on 31 August 2021.





      
        
    Published 30 January 2020
    Last updated 21 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              21 June 2021
              Section on 'Consultation on the UK’s future exhaustion of IP rights regime' has been replaced.
            
            
              30 January 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Smarter rules for safer food: what we are doing
        Exporting when there's a shortage of supply: temporary restrictions
        Civil service pay guidance 2014-15
        Civil service pay guidance 2013-14
        Civil service pay guidance 2018 to 2019

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Intellectual property
        Brexit
        Brexit: business guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    