
      



  
    


      
    Statutory guidance
  

  
  
    Governance and reporting of climate change risk: guidance for trustees of  occupational schemes
  

  
  

  
    
  This guidance aims to improve both the quality of governance and the level of action by trustees must take in identifying, assessing and managing climate risk.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Work and Pensions

      
      Published
      8 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        24 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Governance and reporting of climate change risk: guidance for trustees of occupational schemes
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Governance and reporting of climate change risk: guidance for trustees of occupational schemes
    
        PDF, 494KB, 50 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accessible.formats@dwp.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
From 1 October 2021 the Occupational Pension Schemes (Climate Change Governance and Reporting) Regulations 2021 introduce new requirements relating to reporting in line with the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) recommendations. These aim to improve both the quality of governance and the level of action by trustees in identifying, assessing and managing climate risk.




        
      

      
    Published 8 June 2021
    Last updated 24 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 June 2021
              Edited statutory guidance Part 2, paragraph 20 (3rd bullet) from ‘including assets which are…’ to ‘excluding assets which are…’. Also updated consultation and statutory guidance to fix minor typographical and grammatical errors.
            
            
              8 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pension Schemes: 'maintain practitioner' technical specifications
        Government Science Capability Review
        Asset purchase facility - cash management operations
        Pension Schemes: event report 2015 to 2016
        Business Secretary's statement on coronavirus (COVID-19): 17 April 2020

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy
        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability
        Pensions and ageing society

  


  

  


    
  


    