
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    HMCTS staff guidance on supporting media access to courts and tribunals
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for HMCTS staff to encourage and facilitate media access to our courts and tribunals

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Courts & Tribunals Service

      
      Published
      24 October 2018
      Last updated
      
        25 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    HMCTS media guidance
    
        PDF, 289KB, 8 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    HMCTS media guidance (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    HMCTS media guidance - managing high profile cases
    
        PDF, 240KB, 8 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    HMCTS media guidance - managing high profile cases (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Protocol on sharing court lists, registers and documents with the media
    
        PDF, 51.3KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Protocol on sharing court lists, registers and documents with the media (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Criminal courts guide
    
        PDF, 203KB, 10 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Criminal courts guide (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Civil court guide
    
        PDF, 123KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Civil court guide (accesible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
     Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Family courts guide
    
        PDF, 167KB, 5 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Family courts guide (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Tribunals guide
    
        PDF, 178KB, 8 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Jurisdictional guidance to support media access to courts and tribunals: Tribunals guide (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The principle of open justice is a longstanding feature of our legal system. The public has a right to know what happens in our courts and tribunals, and public confidence in the justice system relies on transparency.

One way this important principle is upheld is the attendance and reporting of proceedings by the media. It is through the media that many people hear about the operation of the justice system and form views on it.

We developed this guide with representatives of the media to ensure that it is best focused to help our staff provide the best possible service to what is an important professional court and tribunal user group.

This guide covers most of the typical media situations our staff are likely to encounter and will be regularly reviewed.

In the following video Tristan Kirk, Courts Correspondent at the Evening Standard introduces the staff guidance and explains why the new guidance is so important for open justice and transparency:

Tristan Kirk, Court Correspondent, Evening Standard



        
      

      
    Published 24 October 2018
    Last updated 25 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              25 June 2021
              Main media guidance document updated with staff advice on dealing with 'contempt of court' including escalation process.

Managing with high profile cases guidance document updated with refefences to managing hearings remotely by Cloud Video Platform (CVP).
            
            
              5 March 2020
              Media guidance documents updated - 5 March 2020.
            
            
              30 January 2019
              Tribunal guide - SIAC information updated.
            
            
              23 November 2018
              Revised tribunals guide uploaded. Link to lists for UT(AAC) altered.
            
            
              24 October 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        HM Courts and Tribunals Service engagement groups
        HMCTS Strategic Engagement Group Meetings
        HMCTS reform events programme
        Flexible operating hours evaluation plan and summary
        International forum on online courts, 3 and 4 December 2018

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Courts, sentencing and tribunals

  


  

  


    
  


    