
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Space to Innovate Campaign - Bravo Drop
  

  
  

  
    
  This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) campaign seeks proposals for novel and innovative future space technologies.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      14 September 2021
      Last updated
      
        19 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Space to Innovate Campaign - Bravo Drop: Competition Document 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Space to Innovate Campaign - Bravo Drop: ISC Terms
    
        PDF, 271KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Space to Innovate Campaign - Bravo Drop: ISC Schedules
    
        PDF, 380KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) Space Programme is seeking proposals that can aid UK Defence and Security to develop future space technologies. We are looking for innovative solutions that can address a series of challenges released in ’drops’ throughout 2021 and 2022. These challenges follow the output of various DASA space themed activities; including Space to Innovate Phase 1 and the International Space Pitch Day. Bravo Drop follows on from the first challenge drop, Alpha Drop, which launched earlier this year and is expected to have contracts awarded in autumn 2021.

The amount available for this campaign up to 31 July 2023 is expected to be £2m. This ‘campaign’ approach enables varied contract values and durations to be undertaken as part of the competition, which provides larger and longer contracts for more mature technologies, whilst also enabling less mature innovations to be explored.

Challenge drops will be open to applications from all suppliers and not just those that submitted successful bids in previous ones.

Any queries should be sent to accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 14 September 2021
    Last updated 19 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 October 2021
              Addition of '9. Clarification Questions'
            
            
              18 October 2021
              Questions and Answers from the 'Your Questions Answered' event on 24 September 2021 have been added, with further information about the competition and how to apply.
            
            
              14 September 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    