
								



To enhance efforts to improve scientific integrity policies, the Task Force on Scientific Integrity is organizing a series of three virtual listening sessions to hear from members of the public who produce, communicate, and use scientific and technical information. Perspectives gathered during the virtual listening sessions will inform the assessment of Federal agencies’ scientific-integrity policies and identification of best practices and lessons-learned that the Task Force is preparing, pursuant to the 
Presidential Memorandum on Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and Evidence-Based Policymaking
.





Each of three virtual listening sessions will be organized around a particular theme as described below:





Session 1: Communications – 
Effective policies and practices to improve the communication of scientific and technological information, including for engagement of Federal scientists and contractors with news media and on social media.
Who:
 News media, science writers, science communicators.
When:
 Wednesday, July 28, 2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time (EDT).
Session 1 Registration
Session 2: Science and Education – 
Effective policies and practices to: support professional development of scientists and researchers of all genders, races, ethnicities, and backgrounds; address scientific integrity issues related to emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence and machine-learning, and evolving scientific practices, such as citizen science and community-engaged research; improve training of scientific staff about scientific integrity; and handle disagreements about scientific methods and conclusions
.
Who: 
Scientists, engineers, and educators.
When:
 Thursday, July 29, 2021, 11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. EDT.
Session 2 Registration
Session 3: Use of Scientific and Technical Information – 
Effectiveness of Federal scientific integrity policies in promoting trust in Federal science and concerns about a lack of scientific integrity impeding the equitable delivery of Federal Government programs.
Who
: Individuals who use Federal scientific and technical information for decision-making or provision of services; individuals from disadvantaged communities; other consumers of science.
When
: Friday, July 30, 2021, 2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. EDT.
Session 3 Registration





Participants in all virtual listening sessions may also comment on the predominant challenges they perceive to scientific integrity in Federal agencies and effective practices for minimizing political or other inappropriate interference in the conduct, communication, or use of Federal science.





Speakers will have up to two minutes to make a comment.  As many speakers will be accommodated as the scheduled time allows. 





Interested individuals should register by 5:00 p.m. EDT on Friday, July 23, 2021.  Staff from the IDA Science and Technology Policy Institute will facilitate the virtual listening sessions.  All virtual listening sessions will be recorded for Task Force use. Participation in a virtual listening session will imply consent to capture participant’s names, voices, and likenesses. Anything said may be recorded and transcribed for use by the Task Force. Moderators will manage the discussion and order of remarks.





Those unable to attend the virtual listening sessions or who would like to provide additional information for consideration by the Task Force are welcome to submit a response to the 
Request for Information (RFI) to Improve Federal Scientific Integrity Policies
 that was issued on June 28, 2021 in the Federal Register. Responses to the RFI should be submitted to 
ScientificIntegrityRFI@ostp.eop.gov
 by Wednesday, July 28, 2021.

			