
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Map the Gap: autonomous gap crossing survey
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA has launched a competition to develop a semi-autonomous reconnaissance and survey system to help troops safely and stealthily advance into enemy territory over water.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Ministry of Defence, and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      18 December 2019
      Last updated
      
        23 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition summary: Map the Gap: autonomous gap crossing survey
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Competition document: Map the Gap: autonomous gap survey crossing
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Innovation Standard Contract - terms: map the gap
    
        PDF, 436KB, 7 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Innovation Standard Contract - schedules: map the gap
    
        PDF, 335KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition, run on behalf of the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), seeks development and demonstration of a number of system demonstrators able to tackle key issues of gap crossing survey.




        
      

      
    Published 18 December 2019
    Last updated 23 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 March 2020
              Addition of common questions asked during dial-in sessions - added to competition document.
            
            
              4 February 2020
              Release of full competition document
            
            
              18 December 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Competition: point of care diagnostics at the front line
        A Joint Effort – Integrating Advanced Materials onto Military Platforms
        Invisible Shield: Countering IEDs by novel technology and techniques
        Rapid sanitising technology improves ambulance cleaning times and standards
        Competition: Don't Blow It! safely eliminating chemical and biological munitions on the battlefield - phase 2

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    