
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    R-Cloud
  

  
  
  
      
  Research Cloud (R-Cloud) is Dstl’s dynamic purchasing system (DPS) for science and technology research.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      2 July 2015
      Last updated
      
        16 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Joining R-Cloud


        
        
          Access R-Cloud


        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
R-Cloud is the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory’s dynamic purchasing system (DPS).

If you are a supplier of science and technology research, whether a sole trader, small to medium-sized enterprise, academic institution or large defence organisation, you can become an R-Cloud member to gain access to a broad selection of Dstl’s contracting opportunities

As a dynamic purchasing system, R-Cloud is different from traditional procurement frameworks. It’s fully electronic and suppliers can apply to join the marketplace of pre-qualified suppliers at any time. It is a rapid and transparent way for industry and academia to access a broad range of research contracts with Dstl, across our capability areas.

R-Cloud is just one of a number of ways to sell to or work with us.

Joining R-Cloud


Suppliers can apply to become R-Cloud members for any or all of the key capability areas at any time. You will need to meet the required technical and commercial metrics, and accept the R-Cloud standard terms and conditions.

All contracting opportunities placed using R-Cloud will be fundamental and applied research tasks covering Technical Readiness Levels (TRLs) 1 to 6, where the intellectual property rights reside solely with the supplier, with Dstl and the Ministry of Defence (MOD) having full user rights.

To become an R-Cloud member, complete a membership application via the R-Cloud portal.

We welcome membership from UK and international research suppliers.


Access R-Cloud


Visit https://rcloud.dstl.gov.uk/


Contact us

    Dstl R-Cloud

    
      Defence Science and Technology LaboratoryPorton DownSalisburyWiltshireSP4 0JQ (Alternative postcode for some sat-nav systems: SP4 0JG)
    

    
        
          Email dstlrcloud@dstl.gov.uk
        


        
          Switchboard 01980 950000
        
    










      
        
    Published 2 July 2015
    Last updated 16 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 August 2021
              Updated URL from https://rcloud-v4.dstl.gov.uk to https://rcloud.dstl.gov.uk/
            
            
              18 January 2016
              Added link to R-Cloud portal (beta).
            
            
              2 July 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        How to license Dstl technologies
        Dstl science and technology procurement frameworks
        How to sell to or work with Dstl

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    