
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Take Cover! Phase 3
  

  
  

  
    
  The Defence and Security Accelerator seeks proposals for novel and innovative technologies for lightweight, rapidly deployable protection on the front-line.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      9 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        20 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Take Cover! Phase 3: Competition Document
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Take Cover! Phase 3: Schedules
    
        PDF, 335KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Take Cover! Phase 3: Terms
    
        PDF, 455KB, 9 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            


The Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) is launching Phase 3 of Take Cover! This competition seeks proposals to access recent innovations in materials science and/or design to provide advanced protection solutions for small groups of front-line troops from ballistic and blast threats.

Within defence and security, protection of personnel is a priority area and deployment of rapid protection solutions for dismounted (on-foot) troops on the front-line is of high importance.

We are interested in integrating proof-of-concept technologies into a single or multiple protection system during this  competition phase.

Phase 3 has up to £480k available to fund multiple proposals.

This competition closes on Thursday 11 February 2021 at midday (GMT).

Queries should be sent to accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.


A series of 15 minute one-to-one teleconference sessions, giving you the opportunity to ask specific questions on this competition are being held on Tuesday 15 December 2020. If you would like to participate, please register on this Eventbrite page. Registration closes on Friday 11 December 2020 at midday (GMT).



A further series of 15 minute one-to-one teleconference sessions, giving you the opportunity to ask specific questions on this competition are being held on 13 January 2021. If you would like to participate, please register on this Eventbrite page. Subject to demand.





        
      

      
    Published 9 December 2020
    Last updated 20 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 January 2021
              Annex B: Clarification Questions added to Competition Document page
            
            
              16 December 2020
              Terms updated to cover COVID related delays
            
            
              9 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces

  


  

  


    
  


    