
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Users’ account details and activity visible to others: improve the safety of your online platform
  

  
  
  
      
  Practical steps to manage the risk of online harms if your online platform makes users’ account details and activity visible to others.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      29 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Harms caused by users’ account details and activity being visible

        
        
          How harms can happen if your users’ account details and activity are visible

        
        
          How to prevent harms relating to visible account details and activity

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
If your users’ account details and activity are visible, this means some or all of them can be seen by other users, or by the general public. These details may include:


  personal details, like their name, age or location
  comments they have made
  content they have viewed


This page will help you understand how making users’ account details and activity visible on a platform can create a risk to users’ safety, and how to manage those risks.


New online safety legislation is coming which will aim to reduce online harms. If you own or manage an online platform in scope of the forthcoming legislation, you will have a legal duty to protect users against illegal content. You will also have to put in place measures to protect children if they are likely to use your service.



Learn what an online harm is

Learn about your responsibilities if you own or manage an online platform or service.

7 step checklist to keep your business and users safe

Taking a safety by design approach

Learn about best practice design if your platform features:


  private or public channels
  live streaming
  anonymous or multiple accounts
  search functionality



Harms caused by users’ account details and activity being visible


Example of a harm that can happen if users’ account details or activity are visible

On an app that allows users to interact with each other, users are required to tick a box to confirm they are over the age of 16. Users can only get messages from approved ‘friends’, but their account details - including username, date of birth, location and biography - are publicly visible.

Because users can verify their own ages, the app is used by children whose personal details could be exploited by offenders.


How harms can happen if your users’ account details and activity are visible

When a user’s activity and details are visible to other users or to the general public, they are more vulnerable to being tracked, targeted or groomed. Their personal information may be shared without their permission, and it is easier for strangers to contact them offline as well as online.

The most likely harms relating to visible account details and activity include:


  
    cyberstalking and cyberbullying
  
  
    hate crime
  
  
    child sexual exploitation and abuse
  
  
    terrorist content
  


How to prevent harms relating to visible account details and activity

1. Know your users


If you allow your users to create accounts, you could:


  
    make users verify their accounts during account creation - for example, using two-factor authentication (2FA)
  
  
    establish how old your users are, using age assurance technology such as age verification
  


Find out more about safety technology providers


2. Set safety settings to high by default


Doing this when a user creates their account will stop their account details and activity from being visible inadvertently. If you do this, you should do it for all users.

The highest safety level you offer should make sure that:


  
    users’ content, contacts and activity are only visible to friends
  
  
    users cannot share their location with strangers
  
  
    automatic face recognition is turned off
  


For users under the age of 18, you may want to (one of the following):


  
    stop them from reducing their safety levels
  
  
    require additional authorisation before they can reduce their safety levels - for example, from a verified parent or guardian using parental controls
  


You can use it to prompt or nudge users when they want to change their safety settings. You should also ask users to confirm they understand the risks associated with changing them before allowing them to continue.




Part of Online safety guidance if you own or manage an online platform




      
        
    Published 29 June 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Live streaming: improve the safety of your online platform
        Search functionality: improve the safety of your online platform
        Safer platform checklist: practical steps to protect your users from online harms
        Anonymous or multiple account creation: improve the safety of your online platform
        Online safety guidance if you own or manage an online platform

  




      

    Collection

  


        Online safety guidance if you own or manage an online platform

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Online safety

  


  

  


    
  


    