
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence Phase 2
  

  
  

  
    
  Up to £3.6 million is available to develop technologies to permit the coexistence of future offshore windfarms alongside UK air defence surveillance systems.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      22 April 2021
      Last updated
      
        11 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence Phase 2: Competition Document
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence Phase 2: ISC Terms
    
        PDF, 294KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence Phase 2: ISC Schedules
    
        PDF, 413KB, 9 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Important update

To submit your SAQ for this competition please follow this link and complete the form.

Please note that the Risk Assessment Reference (RAR) for this completion is RAR-ZKY89CXT and the risk level is “Very Low”. You do not need to answer the questions on pages 3, 4 and 5 which are concerned with higher risk levels.
Complete the final declarations on pages 6 and 7 and submit.

The Defence Cyber Protection Partnership (DCPP) will review your SAQ submission and respond with a reference number within 2 working days. The completed SAQ form and resulting email response from DCPP must be downloaded and included within the DASA submission service portal when the proposal is submitted. Please allow enough time to receive the SAQ reference number prior to competition close at midday on 17 June 2021.


Details

This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals that can develop technologies to permit the coexistence of future offshore windfarms alongside UK Air Defence surveillance systems. This includes alternative technologies that could reduce radar clutter caused by offshore windfarms, ensure intruder detection in the vicinity of offshore windfarms and fill or remove gaps in radar coverage created by windfarms.

The competition is funded by the Department for Business, Energy, and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) Net Zero Innovation Portfolio; and is undertaken in partnership with the Royal Air Force (RAF), the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), and the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA).

A total of up to £3.6m is available, intended to fund a number of contracts of up to £600K each.

Please note this is the 2nd phase of funding for a multi-phase competition. It is not compulsory to have been involved in previous phases to apply. You should however make yourself aware of the previous competition and the bids we funded. It is anticipated that work for this phase will reach higher maturity than work funded in phase 1.

For this phase we are encouraging collaboration between suppliers. To support this we have a short survey to collect details of suppliers who wish to explore collaboration possibilities. This list will then be circulated to all those who have signed up on a weekly basis.

The competition will close at midday BST on 17 June 2021.



        
      

      
    Published 22 April 2021
    Last updated 11 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 June 2021
              Updated SAQ process
            
            
              4 June 2021
              Update on action required regarding SAQ submission.
Funding now approved for competition
            
            
              1 June 2021
              Important update on Supplier Assurance Questionnaires
            
            
              17 May 2021
              Clarifications Annex added
            
            
              22 April 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Scientific research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    