
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Intellectual property rights in Brazil
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance on general intellectual property rights and how to apply these principles in Brazilian markets.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Intellectual Property Office

      
      Published
      5 June 2014
      Last updated
      
        20 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Intellectual property rights in Brazil
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Links for business

Intellectual Property Office (IPO) representative - since August 2012 the IPO has based an attaché in in Brazil, working with representatives from the UK Department for International Trade (DIT) and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. The position is central to the government’s plans to enhance trade relations and to support IP and innovation-led businesses abroad.

British businesses looking for access to intellectual property advice and support should email our attaché Angelica Garcia, based in the Consulate General, Sao Paulo.

UK diplomatic posts - there is a British Embassy in Brasilia, Consulates-General in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, and Commercial Offices in Porto Alegre and Recife. They cannot intervene with Brazilian legal or administrative processes, but they may be able to keep a watching brief when cases are brought to Brazilian courts, or lobby on your behalf if progress is slow.

Find out about the work and services of UK diplomatic posts in Brazil on the UK and Brazil pages.

British Chambers of Commerce (Britcham) - have branches in Brazil and organise IP related events, and their members include local UK lawyers as well as businesses with direct experience of IP issues. Britcham has offices in Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo and Rio Grande do Sul.

National Institute of Industrial Property - is the body responsible for operating the patent, utility model, industrial design and trade mark system in Brazil. The information is however predominately in Portuguese.

Law companies - many law companies, both local and international, have offices in the major cities of Brazil, as well as patent and trade mark attorneys.




        
      

      
    Published 5 June 2014
    Last updated 20 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 August 2021
              HTML document produced replacing the PDF document.
            
            
              17 October 2016
              Change in attache contact information.
            
            
              15 June 2016
              Change in attache contact information.
            
            
              5 June 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        IP in Brazil

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    