
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Claim Research and Development (R&D) expenditure credit
  

  
  
  
      
  Claim R&D expenditure credit (RDEC) to get Corporation Tax relief on your company's research and development costs.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      1 January 2007
      Last updated
      
        28 May 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Costs you can claim

        
        
          Work out the period you can apply relief for

        
        
          How to calculate RDEC


        
        
          How to claim RDEC


        
        
          How to apply the credit

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

R&D expenditure credit (RDEC) replaced the large company scheme in April 2016.

RDEC can also be claimed by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) who have been subcontracted to do R&D work by a large company or who have received a grant or subsidy for their R&D project.

You might do this as a SME if you cannot claim R&D tax relief for SMEs.

The credit is calculated at 13% of your company’s qualifying R&D expenditure (this rate applies to expenditure incurred on or after 1 April 2020) and is taxable. Depending if your company is profit or loss making the credit may be used to discharge the liability or result in a cash payment.

You must meet our definition of R&D to get RDEC.

Costs you can claim

You can claim costs on the project from the date you start working on the uncertainty until you develop or discover the advance, or the project is stopped.

Staff costs

For staff working directly on the R&D project, you can claim a proportion of their:


  salaries
  wages
  Class 1 National Insurance contributions
  pension fund contributions


You can claim for administrative or support staff who work to directly support a project (for example, specialist cleaning staff). You cannot claim for clerical or maintenance work that would have been done anyway, like managing payroll.

You can claim 65% of the relevant payments made to an external agency if they provide staff for the project.

Subcontractor costs

Subcontracted expenditure cannot be claimed unless it is directly undertaken by:


  a charity
  a higher education institute
  a scientific research organisation
  a health service body
  an individual or partnership of individuals


Consumable items

You can claim for all consumable items used up in the R&D. This includes:


  materials
  utilities


Costs that cannot be claimed

You cannot claim for:


  the production and distribution of goods and services
  capital expenditure
  the cost of land
  the cost of patents and trademarks
  rent or rates


Work out the period you can apply relief for

The project starts when you begin working to resolve the uncertainty. You will need to identify the technical issues that need to be resolved, and make sure there is not an existing solution that has already been worked out.

The project ends when you solve the uncertainty or stop working on it. The period you claim R&D expenditure credit for should end once you have a working prototype that solves the problem, and before you go into production.

Your R&D may restart if you find another scientific or technological uncertainty after you have started producing the product. If this happens, you can claim for another period of R&D while you try to resolve it.

You can make a claim up to 2 years after the end of the accounting period it relates to.

How to calculate RDEC


To calculate your expenditure you need to:



Work out the costs that were directly attributable to R&D.


Reduce any relevant subcontractor or external staff provider payments to 65% of the original cost.


Add all costs together.


Multiply the figure by 13% to get the expenditure credit.


Enter this figure into your tax return.



How to claim RDEC


Claim the credit by entering your expenditure into the full Company Tax Return form (CT600).

If your claim covers a period of 12 months or more, submit a separate claim for each accounting period.

You can send more information to HMRC online to support your claim.

To support your claim online, you need a Government Gateway user ID and password. If you do not have a user ID, you can create one the first time you use the service.

What you will need to provide to support your claim

You will need to provide a short summary that explains how your project:


  meets our definition of R&D
  looked for an advance in science or technology and aimed to achieve this advance
  had to overcome scientific or technological uncertainty, and how you overcame this uncertainty
  could not easily be worked out by a professional in the field


If you are claiming the credit on:


  1 to 3 projects, you must include details of all projects
  4 or more projects, you must include detailed descriptions of at least 3 projects ( up to a maximum of 10), which between them cover 50% or more of your total qualifying R&D costs


You will also need:


  the start and end dates of the accounting period relating to the R&D activity – these should be the same dates as the period covered by your CT600 return
  your Unique Taxpayer Reference (UTR) number

  details of your qualifying R&D costs


When you cannot use the online service

If you need to send supporting information for more than 10 R&D projects which cover at least 50% of your total qualifying RDEC costs, you need to either:


  contact your Customer Compliance Manager (CCM) if you have one
  email the information to: RD.IncentivesReliefs@hmrc.gov.uk



How to apply the credit

You must complete the following steps to apply RDEC:



The credit must be used to settle your Corporation Tax liability for the accounting period. However, you’ll need to pay Corporation Tax on the credit. If the credit means you are due a repayment for Corporation Tax that has already been paid, the interest will be calculated on a last in, first out basis.


If you have RDEC remaining after step 1, the amount is reduced by applying a notional tax charge to it. The notional tax charge must be based on the main rate of Corporation Tax for the accounting period. If the amount remaining after step 1 is higher than what the value of the total credit minus the notional tax charge would have been, you must use the value of the total credit minus the notional tax charge in step 3.


The credit must not be higher than your company’s total expenditure on R&D workers’ PAYE and National Insurance contributions for the accounting period. The amount over this limit will be added to any expenditure credit in the next accounting period.


The remaining amount is used to pay any outstanding Corporation Tax liabilities for any accounting periods.


The credit can be surrendered in whole or part to any group member.


The credit can be used to discharge any other company liabilities, like VAT or liabilities under a contract settlement.


The final amount can be paid to your company.






      
        
    Published 1 January 2007
    Last updated 28 May 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 May 2021
              The email address in the 'When you cannot use the online service' section has been updated.
            
            
              17 November 2020
              The Research and Development Expenditure Credit rate changed from 12% to 13% on expenditure incurred on or after 1 April 2020.
            
            
              12 November 2020
              The Research and Development Expenditure Credit rate changed from 12% to 13%.
            
            
              7 June 2019
              Page has been updated with information about your expenditure when working out Research and Development Expenditure Credit
            
            
              20 May 2019
              You can now send supporting information for your RDEC claim using an online service - a link to the service and details of what you'll need has been added to this guidance.
            
            
              7 May 2019
              The Research and Development Expenditure Credit changed from 11% to 12% on 1 January 2018.
            
            
              1 January 2007
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Claiming Research and Development tax reliefs
        Research and Development tax relief for small and medium-sized enterprises
        Research and Development tax relief: Advance Assurance
        Apply for Advance Assurance for Research and Development tax relief
        Research and Development tax relief

  




      

    Collection

  


        Research and Development tax relief

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporation Tax

  


  

  


    
  


    