
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Make use of open standards
  

  
  
  
      
  Use open standards to build technology that is easier to expand and upgrade, and make sure it communicates with other technology.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      6 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How open source differs to open standards

        
        
          How open standards help your programme

        
        
          Building technology that uses open standards

        
        
          Buying technology that uses open standards

        
        
          Supplying technology that uses open standards

        
        
          Related guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet point 4 of the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) your plans must show you’ve considered using open standards and data.

If you’re going through the spend control process you must explain how you’re trying to meet point 4.


The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


How open source differs to open standards

Open source is a way of developing and distributing software. The code is often written collaboratively, and it can be downloaded, used and changed by anyone.

Open standards are common rules that allow any user to create compatible and consistent products, processes and services. They are designed collaboratively, are publicly available, and free or low cost.

How open standards help your programme

You can use open standards for individual parts of your project or programme. Using open standards increases interoperability and means you:


  save time and money by reusing things that are already available
  increase compatibility with a range of stakeholders
  avoid vendor lock-in


Building technology that uses open standards

You can make your technology project or programme more flexible and interoperable by:


  using the open standards principles and complying with any that are compulsory for use in government

  using the recommended open standards that meet your requirements
  being clear what data your systems will hold, and which identifiers are in place to make sure the data can be used effectively
  avoiding the duplication of data, and being very clear about their approved source
  using RESTful APIs for integration where possible and the API technical and data standards

  using or contributing to the government’s API catalogue



Buying technology that uses open standards

When you’re buying a technology product make sure you have included in your requirements:


  any of the open standards that are applicable and compulsory for use in government

  request that open standards used by the supplier comply with the definition of an open standard as described in the ‘Open Standards principles’
  follow the procurement policies for technology from the ‘Public procurement policy’



Supplying technology that uses open standards

Suppliers should be aware of the open standards that are compulsory for use in government.

Wherever possible, suppliers should make these open standards part of their product offering, or offer products that are compatible with these open standards.


Next: Technology Code of Practice point 5 - Use cloud first


Related guides


  Government technology standards and guidance
  Open Standard Principles
  Open Standards for government
  API technical and data standards
  Public procurement policy





      
        
    Published 6 November 2017
    Last updated 31 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 March 2021
              Addition of a temporary research survey to get user feedback on the Technology Code of Practice.
            
            
              6 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Be open and use open source
        Recommended open standards for government
        Manage your data for access and reuse
        Choosing open standards for government
        Government technology standards and guidance

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open standards for government data and technology

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    