





Read Online

United States–Japan Research Exchange on Artificial Intelligence
Proceedings from a Pair of Conferences on the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Work, Health, and Data Privacy and on Disaster Prediction, Resilience, and Recovery
by Scott W. Harold, Greg Brunelle, Ritika Chaturvedi, Jeffrey W. Hornung, Shunichi Koshimura, Osonde A. Osoba, Chizuru Suga
Related Topics: Disaster Recovery Operations, Emergency Services and Response, Health Information Privacy, Japan, Machine Learning, United States
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


2.4 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML — hereafter AI/ML) are being applied widely across the globe, affecting how individuals work, pursue health, and protect their communities. These changes have implications for society, the economy, and data science. The experiences of the United States and Japan, two of the world's wealthiest and most technologically advanced liberal democracies, represent important leading indicators of how AI/ML affect human society now and will continue to do so. At least as important, U.S. and Japanese experiences also carry lessons for each other about how the two sides of the Pacific might think about the policy impacts that AI/ML technologies can have and what policies might be necessary to effectively and safely employ learning algorithms.
Given the importance of understanding the implications of AI/ML, the RAND Corporation convened a pair of public conferences that brought together leading U.S. and Japanese experts on work, health, and data security (Conference I), and on international affairs, disaster response, and disaster modeling (Conference II) to exchange views on some of the most important questions in the application of AI/ML technologies to contemporary policy issues. This report captures insights from the two conferences, recounts some of the exchanges among the participants at those sessions, and is built around the papers that the conference presenters submitted after the conferences concluded. The views articulated and expressed, including those about any technology or commercial product, are those of the participants and should not be construed as an endorsement by RAND or its research sponsors.

Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction

Chapter Two
AI and Labor Automation: A Cross-Cultural Assessment

Chapter Three
Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, and Precision Medicine

Chapter Four
Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Data Governance: Building Trust in Data Flows for the Benefit of Society

Chapter Five
Building Resilience: AI/ML Technologies and Natural Disaster Risk Assessment

Chapter Six
Natural Disasters in the United States and Japan: Where Could AI Be Most Helpful?

Chapter Seven
How AI-Enabled Modeling and Simulation Can Improve Coastal Communities' Preparation, Defense, and Recovery from Disaster: Real-Time Tsunami Inundation Forecasting




Research conducted by

RAND Social and Economic Well-Being



This effort was sponsored by the Government of Japan and conducted in the Community Health and Environmental Policy Program within RAND Social and Economic Well-Being.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Conference proceeding series. RAND conference proceedings present a collection of papers delivered at a conference or a summary of the conference.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 86
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/CFA521-1
Document Number: CF-A521-1
Year: 2020
Series: Conference Proceedings



Explore
Related Topics

Disaster Recovery OperationsEmergency Services and ResponseHealth Information PrivacyJapanMachine LearningUnited States

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Harold, Scott W., Greg Brunelle, Ritika Chaturvedi, Jeffrey W. Hornung, Shunichi Koshimura, Osonde A. Osoba, and Chizuru Suga, United States–Japan Research Exchange on Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings from a Pair of Conferences on the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Work, Health, and Data Privacy and on Disaster Prediction, Resilience, and Recovery. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CFA521-1.html.
Harold, Scott W., Greg Brunelle, Ritika Chaturvedi, Jeffrey W. Hornung, Shunichi Koshimura, Osonde A. Osoba, and Chizuru Suga, United States–Japan Research Exchange on Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings from a Pair of Conferences on the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Work, Health, and Data Privacy and on Disaster Prediction, Resilience, and Recovery, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, CF-A521-1, 2020. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CFA521-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



