
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Exporting firearms
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance for businesses and individuals on what licence and supporting documentation you need to export firearms, ammunition and related equipment.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      3 September 2012
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Check if your items are controlled

        
        
          Export control legislation affecting firearms

        
        
          Licences for the export of firearms

        
        
          Exporting firearms from Great Britain

        
        
          Exporting firearms from Northern Ireland

        
        
          Exporting antique weapons

        
        
          When you do not need an export licence

        
        
          Other firearms export requirements

        
        
          Contact ECJU


        
        
          Notices to exporters

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

Firearms, and their parts, components, accessories or ammunition and related software and technology are controlled strategic goods. Unless an exception applies, you need a licence to export any controlled firearms from the UK to another country.

This applies to:


  individuals
  businesses, including registered firearms dealers
  both permanent, and temporary exports, such as for an exhibition, a competition or for the purpose of a holiday



It is a criminal offence to export controlled goods without the correct licence. Penalties vary depending on the nature of the offence.


This information is for guidance only. It is not a statement of law. Before exporting you should refer to the legal provisions in force at the time. Where legal advice is required, exporters should make their own arrangements.

Check if your items are controlled

Check if your items are controlled and find the appropriate control entry using:


  
    the consolidated list of strategic military and dual-use item that require export authorisation
  
  
    the OGEL and Goods Checker Tools database
  


If your items are not controlled you should only apply for a licence if you have concerns over the end-user or destination.

Export control legislation affecting firearms

The main domestic legislation which governs the export of firearms is the Export Control Order 2008, as amended (‘the Order’). 

Council Regulation (EU) 258/2012 as amended is applicable in Great Britain and as such has the force of law within the UK.

The provisions of the Northern Ireland Protocol mean that Council Regulation (EU) 258/2012 and Council Directive (91/477/EEC), and all other council directives, continue to apply in Northern Ireland.

Export Control Order 2008, as amended (‘the Order’)

Firearms, their parts, components and accessories are described by control entries ML1 and ML2 of Schedule 2 of the Order. Ammunition associated with these firearms, and their specially designed components, are described in ML3 of Schedule 2 of the Order. ML21 and ML22 control respectively software and technology in relation to firearms and ammunition specified in ML1, ML2 and ML3.

Some firearms, their parts, components and accessories are controlled under entries PL9010 and PL9011 of Schedule 3 of the Order. PL9010 and PL9011 only apply when Council Regulation 258/2012 does not. The main difference between entries PL9010 and PL9011 is the destination of the export; PL9010 applies to destinations outside the EU and PL9011 applies to movements within the EU customs territory. Items described in these PL entries do differ slightly. For example, there are additional controls in PL9011 for devices that can be converted from firing blanks and optional deactivation standards.

The Order provides for simplified procedures for the temporary export of firearms, ammunition or sights. This is only when they form part of the personal effects of a person in possession of a European Firearms Pass (EFP).


You cannot use an EFP for exports from Great Britain.


Council Regulation (EU) 258/2012, as amended (‘the Regulation’)

The Regulation implements Article 10 of the United Nations Protocol against the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition.

This regulation has been retained in UK law by the European (Withdrawal) Act 2018 and is applicable in Great Britain. The provisions of the Northern Ireland Protocol mean that Council Regulation (EU) 258/2012, applies in Northern Ireland.

It applies to transfers of firearms not specified in ML1 or ML2 and includes parts (including sound suppressors or moderators), components and ammunition, as described in Annex I. Defined terms in the Regulation only apply to the items described in the Regulation.

Sanctions and embargoes

All arms embargoes include the export of firearms listed in Schedule 2 of the Order.

Find out about current trade sanctions, including arms embargoes and other restrictions.

Licences for the export of firearms

You need a licence to export firearms unless an exception applies.

Open general export licences (OGELs)

OGELs are licences with set terms and conditions which you must comply with.

OGELs which can be used to export firearms include:


  the open general export licences for historic military goods

  the open general transhipment licence (sporting guns)

  some military goods OGELs

  the open general transhipment licence



If you cannot comply with the terms and conditions of an OGEL you must apply for a standard individual export licence (SIEL) or open individual export licence (OIEL).

Check what supporting documentation you need to export firearms.

Supporting documentation for SIELs and OIELs


You must support any SIEL or OIEL firearms application with:


  technical specifications describing the goods to be exported
  a copy of your Firearms Certificate or Section 5 authority to demonstrate that you legally hold the firearms that you intend to export
  a copy of the prior import consent (PIC) from the relevant authority in the destination country of import


In addition:


  a SIEL application requires an end-user undertaking form (EUU) or stockist undertaking (SU)

  an OIEL application requires completion of an OIEL undertaking template

  where items are being exported under an OIEL, a document referring to that licence and giving details of the firearms being transferred must accompany each consignment


Prior import consent

The PIC form indicates that the destination country is content to import the firearms.

You must have PIC before submitting a firearms export licence application. However, many countries do not class some weapons to be firearms so an import consent is not issued. In this instance, an end-user undertaking form (EUU) is required. It must be submitted together with a letter or email from the relevant importing countries licensing authorities stating that a PIC or equivalent cannot be issued.

Exporting firearms from Great Britain

Registered firearms dealers based in Great Britain must apply for a SIEL to export firearms or ammunition to any destination.

ECJU’s optional simplified process prior to any SIEL application allows:


  registered firearms dealers to pre-submit the details of their regular customers
  the necessary advance checks to be made reducing process time


Check the documentation you need to support a SIEL application for firearms.

An OIEL may be appropriate in some circumstances, such as when a specific prior import consent (or form of import authorisation) is not required.

Exporting firearms from Northern Ireland

Exporting to the EU

The dealer-to-dealer open individual export licence (OIEL) authorises Northern Ireland registered firearms dealers to export certain categories of firearms and ammunition. Dealers must demonstrate a business need to use these arrangements and satisfy the documentation needs. Exports under a dealer-to-dealer OIEL apply solely to other gun dealers in the EU.

If you wish to export firearms or ammunition to any other consignee in the EU, you must apply for a SIEL.

You must supply supporting documentation to support an application to export firearms.

Additional documentation required for firearms exports from Northern Ireland to an EU member state are:


  EC3 and EC4 forms to support SIEL applications
  the EC5 transfer declaration form for dealer-to-dealer OIELs




You must forward copies of your completed EC5 form and PIC to firearms-ec5@trade.gov.uk. This must be done at least 2 working days before making a shipment under the authority of a dealer OIEL.


Exporting to non-EU destinations

Apply for a general OIEL for non-EU destinations to cover sales to other registered firearms dealers. This allows multiple exports over a period of usually 3 years.

You must demonstrate a business need and supply supporting documentation for the OIEL application.

Exporting antique weapons

In addition to ECJU’s licensing requirements you must get a separate licence from the Arts Council to export firearms which are:


  over 50 years old
  valued over a certain threshold


This licence is required (unless certain exceptions apply) if you are exporting from the UK for cultural reasons. Depending on the nature of your export, you might be able to use the Arts Council’s Cultural Goods OGEL or an individual licence if you don’t meet the OGEL criteria.

Find out more about licensing requirements for antique weapons.

When you do not need an export licence

If the following exceptions apply you do not need a licence from Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU).

Holders of a European Firearms Pass (EFP)

Individuals in Northern Ireland with an EFP taking personal firearms from Northern Ireland to an EU member state do not need an export licence. This exception is outlined in Article 9 of the Regulation.

Article 15 of the Order also provides an exception for the temporary export of firearms as personal effects from the UK to EU member states. This exception does not extend to weapons specified by ML1 or ML2.

You must ensure that the import of the firearm is acceptable to the authorities of the destination country by obtaining an Import Permit or PIC from the relevant issuing authority. This must be done before the personal effects export takes place. 


Contact the Firearms Licensing Unit within your local police authority to get an EFP.


Individuals in Great Britain must apply for an export licence.

Exceptions for certificate or permit holders

Article 16 of the Order provides an exception for the export of firearms as personal effects from the UK to countries outside the EU.

You do not normally need an export licence to take or send the following items overseas if they are for personal use and part of your personal effects:


  firearms
  shotguns
  related ammunition and sights (non-electronic image enhancement)


This only applies if you have either a valid certificate or visitor’s permit for your firearm or shotgun.

You must have the relevant items entered on the certificate. The certificates and items must be ready to be presented by the holder, or their appointed agent, to an HMRC officer at the place of export.


This exception does not apply to exports to Iran, or to a country or destination specified in Parts 1, 2 and 3 of Schedule 4 of the Order.


Other firearms export requirements

In addition to getting an EFP or export licence you must before you export your items:


  notify your Firearms Licensing Office and provide proof of export
  inform your ferry operator or airline as the company you are travelling with may have additional rules about carrying firearms, sporting guns or ammunition
  declare you are carrying firearms to HMRC
  ensure you have any authority for your firearms to transit any intermediate countries on their way to the final destination


ECJU cannot be held responsible for any actions that authorities in the destination country might take if they believe relevant import regulations have not been satisfied.

Contact ECJU



    Helpline

    
      Export Control Joint UnitDepartment for International Trade
Old Admiralty Building
Admiralty PlaceLondonSW1A 2DY
    

    
        
          Email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 020 7215 4594
        
    

    Contact for general queries about strategic export licensing.



Notices to exporters

Sign up to our notices to exporters email alert service to keep up-to-date with changes to export licences and legislation





      
        
    Published 3 September 2012
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              Updated guidance explaining processes for exporting firearms from Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
            
            
              23 December 2019
              Updated to reflect current regulations.
            
            
              10 October 2019
              This page has been updated to reflect current legislation.
            
            
              3 September 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  

      
    
      Part of
          
            Export goods from the UK: step by step
          
        
  


      
    
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 1:
                  
                
              

              
                Check if you need to follow this process
              
          

          
              Follow these steps if you're moving goods permanently from: 

              
England, Wales or Scotland (Great Britain) to a country outside the UK
Northern Ireland to a country outside the UK and the EU


              What you need to do is different if you are:

              
moving goods between Great Britain and Northern Ireland or Northern Ireland and the EU 
sending goods through the post 
taking a small amount of goods personally to sell abroad 
taking goods temporarily out of the UK 


              Learn about exporting, including making export plans, on great.gov.uk 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 2:
                  
                
              

              
                Check the rules for exporting your goods
              
          

          
              Check duties, rules and restrictions for your goods in the destination country 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      and
                  
                
              

              
                Apply for any licences you need to export your goods
              
          

          
              There are special rules and you may need to get licences or certificates if you are exporting any of the following:

              
animals and animal products 
plants and plant products 
drugs and medicines 
medical devices 
chemicals 
ozone-depleting substances and F-gases 
radioactive substances 
diamonds 
art works, antiques and culturally significant goods 
waste 
goods that could be used for torture or capital punishment 
You are currently viewing: firearms, ammunition and related equipment 
military goods, services and technology 
items that can have both civil and military uses 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 3:
                  
                
              

              
                Get your business ready to export
              
          

          
              You need an EORI number that starts with GB to export goods from England, Wales or Scotland.

              If you move goods to or from Northern Ireland you may need one that starts with XI.

              Get an EORI number 

              Check if you need to register for VAT 

              There are processes that can make clearing customs quicker and easier to manage if you export goods regularly.

              
Find out about using simplified declaration procedures 
Check if you can use Common Transit to move your goods 
Check if Authorised Economic Operator status is right for you 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      and
                  
                
              

              
                Check whoever's receiving the goods can import them
              
          

          
              The business or person receiving the goods to may need:

              
to make an import declaration in their country
licences or certificates to receive goods from the UK


              Check whoever you are sending the goods to is able to import them into their country.

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 4:
                  
                
              

              
                Decide who will make export declarations and transport the goods
              
          

          
              You can hire someone to deal with customs and transport the goods for you, or you can do it yourself. 

              
Find out how to hire someone to deal with customs for you 
Find out how to make export declarations yourself 
Find out how to transport goods out of the UK by road 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 5:
                  
                
              

              
                Classify your goods
              
          

          
              You must find the right commodity code to classify the goods you're exporting.

              Your customs agent or transporter might be able to help you with this.

              Find the right commodity code for your goods 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 6:
                  
                
              

              
                Prepare the invoice and other documentation for your goods
              
          

          
              The completed invoice and any licences or certificates must travel with the goods.

              When filling in the value of your goods on the invoice, use the price you’re selling them for. If you're not selling the goods, use the market value of the goods. List any freight or export insurance you included in the price separately.

              You may need proof of origin if exporting to a country where your goods have a reduced or zero rate of duty.

              Get proof of origin for your goods 

              You might be able to zero rate the goods for VAT. This means you can charge your customers VAT at 0%.

              Check if you can zero rate the goods for VAT 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 7:
                  
                
              

              
                Get your goods through customs
              
          

          
              If you've appointed someone to deal with UK customs for you, they'll make the declaration and get your goods through the UK border.

              Make an export declaration and get your goods cleared by UK customs 

              You may need other documentation to get your goods into the destination country. Ask the person or business buying your goods what information you need to provide.

              Check how to bring goods back into the UK if they were rejected for import at another country’s border 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 8:
                  
                
              

              
                Keep invoices and records
              
          

          
              You must keep commercial invoices and any customs paperwork. 

              If you're VAT registered, record the goods in your VAT accounts even if they are zero-rated.

              Find out how to record the goods in your VAT accounts 

              If you exported controlled goods, for example firearms, keep the paperwork that shows who owns the goods.

          

        
    
  











    