
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Free courses for jobs
  

  
  
  
      
  Details of the free courses and qualifications to help adults (19+) gain skills for life, including eligibility criteria and how to apply.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      1 April 2021
      Last updated
      
        26 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Free qualifications for adults

        
        
          Skills Bootcamps

        
        
          Get advice and support

        
        
          Information for providers and employers

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

If you are aged 19 or over you could access a course for free, as part of the help available from the government to help you access the skills you need to get the job you want - whatever your stage of life.

The free courses include level 3 qualifications and Skills Bootcamps. The government pays the course fees.

Free qualifications for adults

If you are 19 or over and do not already have a level 3 qualification or higher, you can access a free level 3 qualification. Level 3 is equivalent to an advanced technical certificate or diploma, or A levels.

Some of these qualifications are available to study online or part-time.

You may be able to get help to pay for childcare, travel and other costs.

The qualifications could help you:


  gain skills that employers value
  improve your job prospects
  earn a good wage



Read real-life examples of how a free qualification could help you get ahead in work.


Eligibility

You can access one of the free level 3 qualifications if you are aged 19 or over and do not already have a level 3 qualification (equivalent to an advanced technical certificate or diploma, or A levels) or higher.

If you’re 19 to 23 years old, you could also access additional qualifications for free. If you’re in this age group, contact your local college or the National Careers Service for further information.

If you earn below the National Living Wage or are unemployed, from April 2022 you will also be able to access these qualifications for free. This is regardless of any prior qualifications you have.

You may also need to meet the admissions criteria for your chosen course. For example, you may need to have studied a particular subject before at a lower level.

If you are not eligible for this offer, Advanced Learner Loans are available to help you cover the costs of learning, which you pay back when you are earning over a certain amount.

Courses available

Qualifications are currently available in:


  accounting and finance
  agriculture
  building and construction
  business management
  childcare and early years
  digital
  engineering
  environmental conservation
  health and social care
  horticulture and forestry
  hospitality and catering
  manufacturing technologies
  mathematics and statistics
  medicine and dentistry
  public services
  science
  teaching and lecturing
  transportation operations and maintenance
  warehousing and distribution


For more information, you can:


  visit the National Careers Service course finder to find a suitable course near you
  view the full list of free level 3 qualifications included in the offer
  view the full list of providers offering free places for level 3 qualifications



How to apply

If you’re eligible, you will not have to pay for your level 3 qualification. The government will pay the course fees.



Use the National Careers Service course finder to see which courses are available for free in your local area or online. You can set the distance you are willing to travel.


Contact the college or training provider. You can confirm they offer the qualification you’re interested in, check the admissions criteria and apply for the course in the normal way.


If you’re accepted onto the course you will not have to pay a course fee. You may also be able to get help to pay for childcare, travel and other costs.



Skills Bootcamps

Skills Bootcamps offer free, flexible courses of up to 16 weeks. They help you to build up specialist in-demand skills and fast-track to an interview with a local employer.

Skills Bootcamps are being delivered in partnership with employers, providers and local authorities to help people gain skills for life.

Subjects available

Skills Bootcamps are available in:


  digital courses such as digital marketing or coding
  technical training in skills like construction or logistics
  green skills like solar energy


View the list of Skills Bootcamps to see what’s available in your area, or online, and what’s coming soon. This list will grow as more Skills Bootcamps become available.

Eligibility

You are eligible to apply for a Skills Bootcamp if you are:


  aged 19 or over
  employed, self-employed, have recently become unemployed (in the past 12 months) or are returning to work after a break


Some Skills Bootcamps have additional eligibility criteria.

How to apply

The list of Skills Bootcamps provides links and locations for existing, new and upcoming courses. You can find out which providers are offering courses in your area, and visit their webpage for further information.


Read real-life examples of how a Skills Bootcamp could fast-track you to a better job.


Get advice and support

The National Careers Service offers free and impartial advice to help with decisions about careers, training courses and work.

Your local authority or Jobcentre Plus may offer additional free courses.

If you claim Universal Credit, you can apply for one of these free courses, provided it will improve your chances of securing work. Many Universal Credit claimants can currently take full-time training up to 12 weeks, and up to 16 weeks for a full-time Skills Bootcamp in England. Your local Jobcentre Plus can offer further guidance about this and help to identify the learning that works for you.

Find out more about how the government is supporting you to gain skills for life, whatever stage of your life.

Information for providers and employers

Information is available for colleges and training providers on the National Skills Fund.

Information is available for employers about these offers and other support available through the Plan for Jobs.




      
        
    Published 1 April 2021
    Last updated 26 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 November 2021
              Updated the information about adults who claim Universal Credit. Also updated the 'Free qualifications for adults' eligibility section to confirm that from April 2022, any adult in England earning under the National Living Wage will also be able to access these qualifications for free, regardless of their prior qualification level.
            
            
              27 September 2021
              Added information to confirm that Skills Bootcamps are quality assured by Ofsted and updated Skills Bootcamps subjects available to reflect the range of courses available.
            
            
              18 September 2021
              Removed the information about the National Skills Fund consultation as the consultation has now closed.
            
            
              13 September 2021
              Added a link to the National Careers Service course finder which you can use to see which courses are available for free in your local area or online.
            
            
              29 July 2021
              Added 'hospitality and catering' to the list of subjects available and updated 'eligibility' and 'how to apply' sections.
            
            
              15 July 2021
              We have added information about Skills Bootcamps including details on how to apply and a link to the list of available Skills Bootcamps. We have also added a link to our consultation on the National Skills Fund.
            
            
              10 May 2021
              Added information about a temporary extension to the length of time people can undertake training to develop work-related skills and qualifications while still receiving Universal Credit.
            
            
              1 April 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        National Skills Fund
        Find a Skills Bootcamp
        National retraining scheme
        Find a free level 3 qualification
        Qualifications in new funded offers
        Further education courses and funding

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Adult and community learning

  




      

    Topical events

  


        Skills for Life

  


  

  


    
  


    