
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Guidance on the operation of the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance on the operation of ASPA.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      1 December 2017
      Last updated
      
        11 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Guidance on the operation of ASPA

        
        
          Business continuity planning guidance

        
        
          Technical advice

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Guidance on the operation of ASPA

The Guidance on the operation of ASPA (PDF, 2.21MB, 164 pages) is intended to be a reference document that explains how the act is administered and enforced and provides detailed guidance to holders of establishment licences, project licences and personal licences and new licence applicants.

In developing the guidance we consulted widely with stakeholders and the Animals in Science Committee. Copies of the guidance can be purchased from TSO bookshop using the ISBN 9780108560316. An explanatory memorandum was also laid in Parliament.

Business continuity planning guidance

The business continuity planning guidance for establishments (PDF, 185KB, 13 pages) reminds and provides advice to establishment licence holders of the requirements for contingency planning, emergency response, and business continuity planning.

Technical advice

This technical advice complements our guidance on the operation of the ASPA. The documents provide advice on interpretation of ASPA and are intended for licence holders and individuals working in this field and this includes:


  code of practice for the care and accommodation of animals
  advice notes
  additional guidance documents


If you have any questions on these please contact: ASRUBusiness@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk





      
        
    Published 1 December 2017
    Last updated 11 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 March 2020
              Added 'Business continuity planning guidance for establishments’.
            
            
              6 December 2018
              Added new section and advice notes on eﬃcient breeding of genetically altered animals.
            
            
              1 December 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Animal research: technical advice
        Code of practice for the housing and care of animals bred, supplied or used for scientific purposes
        Consolidated version of ASPA 1986
        Extracts from the code of practice for the housing and care of animals used for scientific purposes
        Animal testing and research: guidance for the regulated community

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Wildlife, animals, biodiversity and ecosystems
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    