
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    How to do business with Sellafield Ltd
  

  
  
  
      
  How to find and apply for opportunities at Sellafield.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Sellafield Ltd

      
      Published
      31 July 2017
      Last updated
      
        17 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Current suppliers

        
        
          Find an opportunity with Sellafield Ltd

        
        
          Procurement schedules

        
        
          Procuring innovation

        
        
          Find an opportunity with Tier 2 suppliers

        
        
          Major frameworks and contracts

        
        
          SMEs - LINC with Sellafield Ltd

        
        
          SME action plan

        
        
          Contacting us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Sellafield Ltd’s work at Sellafield can only be achieved through strong partnership with the supply chain.

The Sellafield Ltd Supply Chain Strategy 2019/20 sets out how we will work with the supply chain to deliver the Sellafield mission.

Sellafield Ltd does not operate a preferred supplier list.

Contract opportunities are awarded through open competition in line with the general European Treaty principles of non-discrimination, equal treatment and transparency in order to ensure we provide value for money to government.

Opportunities are also available for businesses to work indirectly as a subcontractor through our Tier 2 partners.

Video - How to do business with Sellafield Ltd

Current suppliers

Information for current suppliers is published on Sellafield Ltd’s Management of Contractors portal.

You will be asked to register on this system when you start working with Sellafield Ltd.

Find an opportunity with Sellafield Ltd

Current opportunities to do business with Sellafield Ltd are advertised in our Complete Tender Management (CTM) system and dependent on the value of the contract opportunity via the Find a Tender service.

Once you are registered on the system, you can use it to manage your tendering activities.

Opportunities are also listed in Contracts Finder.

Procurement schedules

The Sellafield Ltd Procurement Plan schedule gives details of recently awarded and upcoming procurements with a value over £100,000 over the next 3 years.

Procuring innovation

Sellafield Ltd are reliant on our supply chain to bring innovation into the organisation to help us solve some of our most complex and challenging problems.

We need innovative ways of doing this and are reliant on our supply chain to help us solve some challenging problems.

Our procurement routes for innovation outlines a number of ways in which we may bring solutions into the business.

Procurement routes for innovation

Find an opportunity with Tier 2 suppliers

There can be opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and specialist suppliers to supply indirectly through our Tier 2 suppliers who have been awarded contracts or frameworks with Sellafield Ltd.

Major frameworks and contracts

The Sellafield Ltd major framework and contracts document gives an overview of all our major frameworks and contracts in existence to deliver works on the Sellafield site.

The document is useful for both existing and potential suppliers looking to further understand our supply chain landscape and to be used in conjunction with the Tier 2 listing which explains what the main site contractors are looking for in their supply chain.

SMEs - LINC with Sellafield Ltd

LINC with Sellafield Ltd is a scheme that encourages SMEs at local and national level to collaborate and deliver innovative solutions to the mission at Sellafield.

Work packages that set out some of the challenges we are addressing at Sellafield will be published on this page.

LINC has been designed to provide Sellafield Ltd with direct access to SMEs in addition to supporting Sellafield Ltd’s contribution to the UK SME agenda.

All SMEs must be pre-qualified with LINC before submitting a proposal. Details of qualified SMEs will be published periodically to support and encourage further collaboration.

Non-SMEs are free to qualify with LINC but their participation will be limited to a supporting role only.

As part of the qualification process, companies/businesses will be categorised into one of the following:

Category 1 -  SME


  those companies that meet the strict EU definition.



Category 2 -  Supplier


  those companies that have less than 250 employees and an annual turnover of less than 50 million euros (approximately £45 million) or annual balance sheet not exceeding 43 million euros (approximately £38 million) but who are part of a larger group of companies which collectively exceed those thresholds


Both category 1 and 2, are eligible to participate directly in LINC, however submissions from category 2 will only be considered should an acceptable submission (defined relative to each opportunity) not be received from category 1.

Supporting Companies


  those companies who do not meet the EU definition of an SME in terms of numbers of employees and turnover or balance sheet thresholds


Supporting companies are not permitted to participate directly, but may participate as part of an SME led proposal.

All LINC advertised opportunities shall be valued at no more than £177,898 excluding VAT and therefore less than the prevailing Global Procurement Agreement threshold levels for supplies and services applicable to the Public Contracts Regulations 2015 (Procurement Policy Note 09/21). No contracts advertised through LINC will be awarded in excess of this threshold.

Opportunities above these threshold levels will be made available through the Complete Tender Management (CTM) system and published on the find a Tender.

To maintain simplicity, all subsequent contracts will be subject to a standard Form of Contract which will be set out within each opportunity.

How to qualify:

LINC with Sellafield Ltd has now transitioned over to the Complete Tender Management (CTM) system, therefore in order to qualify for LINC in CTM please either log in with your existing details or if you are new to CTM register as a ‘new supplier’ and navigate to RFQ 10536 -  LINC Qualification.

Please complete the qualification form which is attached to the tender in order to be able to qualify for any future LINC opportunities.

If you have any questions regarding the qualification please contact:linc@sellafieldsites.com

Qualified companies

Details of companies that have qualified for LINC with Sellafield Ltd.

The list will be updated on a regular basis.

SME action plan

As a public contracting authority Sellafield Ltd are committed to delivering activities which increase the opportunities for SMEs (small to medium enterprises) to do business in our supply chain.

We have a target to spend 32 - 33% of our supply chain spend with SMEs in 2021/22.

We publish our activities which drive towards this target in the form of an annual SME action plan.

Contacting us

If your business has processes or engineering technologies that could support Sellafield Ltd’s work at Sellafield, please contact our supply team.

The team can also answer questions, enquiries or issues about working with Sellafield Ltd.





      
        
    Published 31 July 2017
    Last updated 17 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 December 2021
              Changes to the LINC threshold.
            
            
              22 November 2021
              Updated LINC registered company list
            
            
              4 August 2021
              Additional innovation procurement detail
            
            
              30 July 2021
              New major frameworks and contracts document added.
            
            
              26 May 2021
              SME action plan added
            
            
              29 March 2021
              COVID-19 information box has been deleted from the page.
            
            
              14 January 2021
              Business Open Sessions update
            
            
              17 April 2020
              Sellafield Ltd Supply Chain Guidance added.
            
            
              11 April 2019
              Document link updated
            
            
              25 March 2019
              Registered Companies & Categories list has been updated
            
            
              12 March 2019
              Attached document has replaced previous document
            
            
              5 March 2019
              Updated to include latest LINC challenge
            
            
              25 July 2018
              New LINC package available
            
            
              22 June 2018
              New LINC opportunity available
            
            
              13 April 2018
              LINC work package 3 has been added to the LINC area on this page.
            
            
              2 November 2017
              LINC with Sellafield Ltd list of registered companies have been added
            
            
              28 September 2017
              Change of contact details and additional information regarding the new LINC scheme.
            
            
              31 July 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        LINC with Sellafield Ltd - registered companies
        Sellafield Ltd - Major frameworks and contracts
        Sellafield Ltd Procurement Plan Schedule - November 2021
        Find an opportunity with Tier 2 suppliers
        Procurement Plan

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and the environment

  


  

  


    
  


    