

Prateek Sibal: The United Nations and the Governance of AI



Speaker:
Prateek Sibal 
Programme Specialist, Digital Innovation and Transformation, Communication and Information Sector, UNESCO 




Date:
Tuesday, September 14, 2021


Time:
12:00 p.m. PDT (3:00 p.m. EDT)

Program
 The recent advances made within the realm of Artificial Intelligence have sparked widespread debate around the frameworks for its regulation. As such, its varied applications have raised several pertinent questions related to the long-term implications and ethical considerations for its use globally. And while several different approaches to its regulation have been proposed and implemented across different geographies and political systems, an important consideration still remains - that of the role of inter-governmental agencies; specifically, the United Nations.

Join us for an in-depth discussion with Prateek Sibal, moderated by Osonde Osoba, on the role of a specialized UN agency, UNESCO, in the governance of AI. The conversation will sketch the goals, tools, and limitations of its role, while exploring the role of the government and other public and private actors in AI's regulation and long-term use.
Speaker
 Prateek Sibal is a technology policy researcher with interest in transnational governance of artificial intelligence (AI), ethics of information and media economics. He looks at the impact of digital technologies, especially AI, on societies from a human rights, openness, inclusive access and governance perspective.

His work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation’s (UNESCO) Digital Innovation and Transformation section spans research, advocacy for human centered AI, policy advice and development of human and institutional capacity building programmes for the governance of digital technologies.

 Osonde Osoba is codirector of the RAND Center for Scalable Computing and Analysis, a senior information scientist at RAND, and a professor at Pardee RAND Graduate School. He is associate director of the Tech + Narrative Lab at Pardee RAND, and teaches courses including Introduction to Data Science, and Machine Learning.About IDSS
The International Development Speaker Series is a student-led initiative sponsored by Pardee RAND Graduate School and several RAND research units: RAND Labor and Population, RAND International, RAND Health, RAND Education, and RAND Justice, Infrastructure, and Environment.Learn more about the International Development Speaker Series
This event is cohosted by the Pardee RAND Tech + Narrative Lab.

