
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Engineering Officers and Ratings
  

  
  
  
      
  Information on how to gain a UK CoC for Engineering/Electro-Technical Officers or Engineering Watch Rating Certificate

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Maritime and Coastguard Agency

      
      Published
      9 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Application process

        
        
          Fast track requests

        
        
          NOE resits

        
        
          Merchant Navy

        
        
          Royal Navy conversion to Merchant Navy

        
        
          Small vessels

        
        
          Commercial and private yachts (over 24m)

        
        
          Electro-technical officer (ETO)

        
        
          Watch rating certificate

        
        
          Fishing CoC

        
        
          New tanker endorsements

        
        
          IGF Code

        
        
          Limitation removal

        
        
          CoC replacement

        
        
          CoC revalidation

        
        
          PSSR, EFA and MFA

        
        
          Temporary certification replacement

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Application process

If this is towards your first UK certificate, you must post your application and original documents (except passport which must be an attested copy) to:


Seafarer Certification 2/11
Maritime and Coastguard Agency
Spring Place
105 Commercial Road
Southampton
SO15 1EG



If you already hold a MCA-issued CoC, MEOL or watch rating certificate: please email your application and scanned documents to engineering@mcga.gov.uk

Please ensure your documents are included as attachments or within a .zip folder. Unfortunately, we can’t open .rar extensions or links to file-sharing services (e.g. OneDrive, Google Drive, Dropbox etc).

Fast track requests

It is unlikely we will consider expediting a NOE (including Resit) or Rating application within our service standard of 28 days, or within 14 days for all other applications.

If you have been waiting longer than this and need us to assess your application on an urgent basis, please ask your company to email engineering@mcga.gov.uk directly with your full name, date of birth and a compelling reason (including the vessel joining date).

For NOE applications, your company must also confirm to us that you meet all of the licence requirements i.e. the only barrier to gaining the licence is you need to sit the MCA oral exam.

For NOE resits, it is unlikely we will be able to consider a fast-track request if you’ve already had 3 attempts or more.

NOE resits
If you fail your MCA oral exam and wish to resit it, please email the NOE Fail to engineering@mcga.gov.uk. The fee is currently £159 and should be paid for online to prevent delays.

This process also applies if you passed your oral exam more than 3 years ago.

Unused NOE
If you were issued with a NOE over 5 years ago but did not sit the exam, the fee is reduced (currently £90). We’ll also need to see two forms of evidence showing 6 months’ seagoing service in the last 5 years.

Merchant Navy



  
MSF 4275 - Application form for an oral examination leading to the issue of a certificate of competency (STCW) engineer officers in the merchant navy



For guidance on the licence requirements, please see MSN 1857


  Engineer Officer of the Watch Unlimited III/1: sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4
  Second Engineer Unlimited III/2: section 3.5
  Chief Engineer Unlimited III/2: section 3.6
  To obtain both motor and steam endorsements: Annex A
  MEOL (serve as Chief Engineer on motorships <750 kW in UK near coastal area): section 10.2


Holders of non-UK CoCs


  To obtain UK EOOW III/1: section 3.3 of MSN 1857

  To obtain UK Second Engineer III/2: section 9.3.1
  To obtain UK Chief Engineer III/2: section 9.3.2


Please note your non-UK CoC must be valid upon application and remain valid until we print your CoC.

Common queries


  You must pass EK General and Motor and/or Steam together. If you fail one, you must retake both.
  You cannot sit SQA management exams outside the UK.
  HNC exemptions for Second Engineer ended 31st July 2021. From August 2021, applicants will need to sit the six management level academic examinations as per section 7.2.2 of MSN 1857.


Royal Navy conversion to Merchant Navy
We have a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Royal Navy, giving a route to Merchant STCW Certification based on the education and training, as well as experience, gained whilst in the Navy.

For those in the surface fleet, please see the Engineering Royal Naval Conversion Flow Chart. More information can be obtained directly from the Royal Navy (contact details on request).

If you are a Submariner, we are currently in discussions regarding routes taking into account your education, training and experience. We can raise your case directly with our examiner for review if needed; please email engineering@mcga.gov.uk with your Rank, service history and any relevant education and training.

There is currently no equivalent MOU for other former UK military personnel.

Small vessels


  
MSF 4900 - Application form for an oral examination leading to the issue of an (STCW) engineer officer small vessel certificate of competency



To enter the Small Vessel structure, please familiarise yourself with MIN 524 and contact a MCA-approved Small Vessel Engineering training provider to enrol and obtain an action plan.

Exemptions
Please do not apply for exemptions before obtaining an action plan


  For Yacht Skills Test, please contact a MCA-approved Small Vessel Engineering training provider or IAMI

  For AEC I & II, please contact a MCA-approved Small Vessel Engineering training provider or IAMI

  For General Engineering Science I & II, please contact IAMI



Conversions

Conversion routes are currently open to UK CoC holders only. Please see page 19 onwards of MIN 524. If you hold a superior capacity on your CoC (e.g. EOOW Unlimited III/1), this will carry over to your new CoC.

For conversion N1 (EOOW to SVE 2nd Eng), you don’t need HELM (Operational) unless you qualified as an EOOW before September 2013.


All conversion routes require 6 months’ seagoing service in the last 5 years. Section 4.8 of MIN 524 (1.5 x actual rate for yachts) doesn’t apply to conversions.


Commercial and private yachts (over 24m)


The MCA intends to close the yacht route fully on 31 December 2022 - this means completing all required modules and sea time, with only the MCA oral exam left to take.




  
MSF 4278 - Application form for an oral examination leading to the issue of certificate of competency (STCW) engineer officers on commercially and privately operated yachts



For guidance on the licence requirements, please see MSN 1859


  MEOL(Y): section 3.3
  Y4 Chief Engineer III/3 <200 GT and <1,500 kW: section 3.4
  Y3 Chief Engineer III/3 <500 GT and <3,000 kW: section 3.5
  Y2 Chief Engineer III/3 <3,000 GT and <3,000 kW: section 3.6
  Y1 Chief Engineer III/2 <3,000 GT and <9,000 kW: section 3.7
  Conversion Routes: Annex F


Electro-technical officer (ETO)


  
MSF 4259 - Application form for an oral exam leading to the issue of an STCW electro technical officer (ETO) certificates of competency (CoC)



You should follow either:


  3.2 of MSN 1860 (experienced seafarer) and get an action plan, or;
  3.1 of MSN 1860 and seek support for an ETO cadetship.


In all cases, please contact a MCA-approved Nautical College.

Senior Electro-technical officer (SETO)

SETO is not recognised by STCW and consequently will not appear on a Safe Manning Document. To obtain SETO by written examination, please contact IAMI for exam details.

Watch rating certificate


  
MSF 4371 - Application form for MCA issued watch rating certificate (engine room or electro-technical)



Electro-technical
For guidance on Electro-technical Rating III/7, please see section 5 of the form (above).

Engine room
For guidance on Engine Room Watch Rating Certificate III/4, please see MSN 1863, in particular section 2.2 (sea service reduction).

If you are unable to complete the steam tasks on board, you have a few options:


  You could complete the boiler tasks at a college which has a simulator course covering the relevant items, or;
  Your company may be able to arrange for the tasks to be completed at a shore based location (e.g. some refineries will have boiler systems identical to those found on vessels), or;
  We can issue a limited certificate (“not valid on ships with steam plant and oil/gas fired boiler”).


Fishing CoC
Fishing vessels over 750kW must carry two engineers: a Chief Engineer holding a Fishing Class 1 and a Second Engineer holding a Fishing Class 2. This is regardless of the vessel’s length, tonnage or area of operation.

For the licence requirements and how to apply, please see: Guidance for obtaining UK MCA engineering fishing certificates of competency.

New tanker endorsements


  
MSF 4210 - Application form for a tanker endorsement on a UK CoC



Sea service/training/occupation must be within the last 5 years:

Basic/Operational level


  Relevant MCA-approved Basic Tanker Training, and;
  
MCA-approved Tanker Fire Fighting.


Advanced/Management level


  You must meet the basic level requirements (as above) unless you are exempt because you hold the corresponding basic endorsement on your UK CoC, or you are applying for Advanced Oil/Chemical and hold the opposite Advanced Oil/Chemical endorsement on your UK CoC, and;
  Relevant MCA-approved Advanced Tanker Training, and;
  Two forms of evidence (e.g. discharge book and dangerous cargo testimonials) showing 90 days’ seagoing service on board a tanker carrying the relevant cargo.


Lapsed endorsements

If you previously held tanker endorsement(s) on your UK CoC but they were removed, you will still need to complete MSF 4210 and pay the fee, however, the requirements are:


  90 days’ seagoing service on board a tanker carrying the relevant cargo, or;
  Relevant MCA-approved tanker training certificate(s), or;
  30 months’ occupation in a role involving loading/unloading dangerous cargo.


IGF Code
For guidance on our requirements, please see MIN 595. For training for service on ships using fuels covered within the IGF Code, please see our list of MCA-approved training providers.

Limitation removal
To remove High Voltage, Davit, Navigational Systems or Radio Equipment limitations, please apply using form
MSF 3901.

You can also use this form to change your name.

CoC replacement
You can apply for a replacement using form MSF 4299. If your CoC was stolen, you must report it to the Police.

CoC revalidation
CoCs are valid for 5 years. Fishing CoCs, MEOLs and Rating Certificates don’t need to be revalidated.

Please see our detailed guidance on how to revalidate a UK CoC.

PSSR, EFA and MFA
Your UK CoC is proof that you have met the requirements for PSSR (A-VI/1-4), EFA (A-VI/1-3) and MFA (A-VI/4-1). There’s also no requirement to update these three courses. If an employer is querying this, please refer them to sections 3.2 and 3.3 of MIN 535.

‘First Aid at Sea’ certificate issued before August 1998 should be considered as equivalent to MFA (A-VI/4-1) as per MGN 147.

Temporary certification replacement
Between 23 March 2020 and 31 January 2021, the MCA issued temporary electronic certification in line with MIN 611 Amendment 1 as an interim COVID-19 measure.

Our branch has now emailed all seafarers who were issued these temporary certificates with a view to replace them with full term physical certification.

If you have not heard from us, please email engineering@mcga.gov.uk




      
        
    Published 9 June 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        How to apply for an engineering small vessel CoC
        MIN 620 (M) Amendment 1: Update on online oral exams and future issue of NOEs during COVID-19 lockdown
        MIN 524 Engineer officer small vessel Certificate of Competency
        How to apply for a UK engineer officer certificate of competency

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Training and certification

  


  

  


    
  


    