
      



  
    


      
    International treaty
  

  
  
    UK/USA: Agreement  in the form of an Exchange of Notes between the United Kingdom and the United States of America on Technology Safeguards associated with United States Participation in Space Launches from the United Kingdom [CS USA No.1/2020]
  

  
  

  
    
  This treaty was presented to Parliament in October 2020.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      16 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        8 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    UK/USA: Agreement  in the form of an Exchange of Notes between the United Kingdom and the United States of America on Technology Safeguards associated with United States Participation in Space Launches from the United Kingdom
    
        
          Ref: ISBN 978-1-5286-2181-6, CP 307
        
        PDF, 680KB, 20 pages
    
      Order a copy


  

  
      
  
  
    Correction slip: UK/USA: Agreement  in the form of an Exchange of Notes between the United Kingdom and the United States of America on Technology Safeguards associated with United States Participation in Space Launches from the United Kingdom 
    
        PDF, 708KB, 21 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Explanatory memorandum: UK/USA: Agreement  in the form of an Exchange of Notes between the United Kingdom and the United States of America on Technology Safeguards associated with United States Participation in Space Launches from the United Kingdom 
    
        ODT, 37.9KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    US - UK MOU - Side Arrangement
    
        PDF, 54.6KB, 6 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    UK-US Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) for Spaceflight Activities: Understanding the TSA
    
        PDF, 168KB, 4 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    UK-US Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) for Spaceflight Activities: Understanding the TSA
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Published title: Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Notes between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the United States of America on Technology Safeguards associated with United States Participation in Space Launches from the United Kingdom.



        
      

      
    Published 16 October 2020
    Last updated 8 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 February 2021
              Included: UK-US Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) for Spaceflight Activities: Understanding the TSA
            
            
              16 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Bilateral treaties published in the Country Series

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Spaceflight

  


  

  


    
  


    