
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Land contamination risk management (LCRM)
  

  
  

  
    
  How to assess and manage the risks from land contamination.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Environment Agency

      
      Published
      8 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        19 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England, Northern Ireland and Wales


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    LCRM: Before you start
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    LCRM: Stage 1 risk assessment
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    LCRM: Stage 2 options appraisal
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    LCRM: Stage 3 remediation and verification
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Environment Agency expects you to follow this guidance if you are managing the risks from land contamination.

If you use this guidance outside England, check with the relevant regulator about its suitability.

You can use this guidance in Wales but you must also see land contamination: our role in managing and dealing with land contamination for any different requirements.

For Northern Ireland, you must also refer to the Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs practice guide – redeveloping land affected by contamination.

Local authorities and other regulators may also provide additional guidance.




        
      

      
    Published 8 October 2020
    Last updated 19 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 April 2021
              Updated the section on chemical testing of soils (in LCRM: Stage 1 risk assessment) with a new protocol for using rapid measurement techniques. Added a new section on the CL:AIRE gas protection verification accreditation scheme. Added a reference to Natural Resources Wales who have now adopted the guidance.
            
            
              8 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Contaminated land exposure assessment (CLEA) tool
        Contaminated land statutory guidance
        Land contamination: technical guidance
        Updated technical background to the CLEA model (SR3)
        Land contamination: using soil guideline values (SGVs)

  




      

    Collection

  


        Housing development support for local government projects

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Environmental planning
        Land and development opportunities

  


  

  


    
  


    