
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Announcement of Opportunity: Aurora Science 2020
  

  
  

  
    
  Aiming to support planetary exploration science to enhance the UK’s capabilities and cross-disciplinary approach.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      20 March 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Aurora Science: Announcement of Opportunity  
    
        ODT, 2.05MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The UK Space Agency is making funding available for Aurora science.

The purpose of this AO is to support science and operations associated with Martian planetary exploration and to enhance the UK’s capabilities and cross-disciplinary approach to planetary science. The ExoMars programme is already underway, with an orbiter already at Mars.

A key goal of the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter (TGO) is to detect and characterise trace gases in the Martian atmosphere and gain a better understanding of methane and other atmospheric gases that are present in small concentrations but could be evidence for possible biological or geological activity.  The ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover, now due for launch in 2022, will search Mars for signs of biosignatures from past life preserved within the subsurface via drilling up to 2 metres into the surface.

This scheme is open to academics and individual scientists from the UK or overseas, working at UK Research Organisations, for proposals to fund:


  Fellowships to develop promising early career researchers
  Post Doctorate Research Assistants
  Support for academics
  Studentships.


Applications are particularly welcome in the following areas:


  InSight and TGO data exploitation
  Work that underpins the analysis of ExoMars data, including modelling/theory
  Support activities in preparation for Mars Sample Return.




        
      

      
    Published 20 March 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    