
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Data Ethics Framework
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for public sector organisations on how to use data appropriately and responsibly when planning, implementing, and evaluating a new policy or service.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      13 June 2018
      Last updated
      
        16 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Data Ethics Framework
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Data Ethics Framework
    
        PDF, 524KB, 38 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Data Ethics Framework: glossary and methodology
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Data Ethics Framework: legislation and codes of practice for use of data
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Data Ethics Framework: editable template
    
        ODT, 538KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@dcms.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Data Ethics Framework is a set of principles to guide the design of appropriate data use in the public sector. It is aimed at anyone working with data in the public sector, including:


  data practitioners (for example statisticians, analysts and data scientists)
  policymakers
  operational staff
  people helping to produce data-informed insight


The ‘Data Ethics Framework: legislation and codes of practice for use of data’ document outlines the main pieces of legislation that apply to using data.

The ‘Data Ethics Framework: editable template’ document will help teams working with data record their answers to the framework questions.




        
      

      
    Published 13 June 2018
    Last updated 16 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 September 2020
              Replaced the 2018 Data Ethics Framework with the 2020 version. The 2020 Data Ethics Framework consists of 3 overarching principles (transparency, accountability, fairness) and 5 specific actions that will help teams improve ethical standards in their work.
            
            
              30 August 2018
              PDF version of the Data Ethics Framework added.
            
            
              13 June 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Data ethics and AI guidance landscape
        Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety
        A guide to using artificial intelligence in the public sector
        Choose tools and infrastructure to make better use of your data
        Define your purchasing strategy

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability

  


  

  


    
  


    