
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Aims of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot standards
  

  
  
  
      
  Each standard has a set of aims that participants should achieve if they have followed all the actions. These aims are the primary focus for site visits.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      7 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        17 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Arable and horticultural land standard

        
        
          Arable and horticultural soils standard

        
        
          Farm woodland standard

        
        
          Hedgerows standard

        
        
          Improved grassland standard

        
        
          Improved grassland soils standard

        
        
          Low and no input grassland standard

        
        
          Water body buffering standard

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Site visits will check the aims for land in the standard agreement only.


Arable and horticultural land standard

There are 3 aims at introductory level, 4 aims at intermediate level and 5 at advanced level.

1. Provision of habitats for wildlife

Habitats will provide year-round food and shelter for birds, pollinators and other beneficial insects. There will be roughly equal amounts of:


  sites rich in insects and flowers
  areas with sown winter seed


There will be wildlife habitats created on a percentage of land in the standard, depending on the level:


  5% at introductory level
  8% at intermediate level
  10% at advanced level


Intermediate and advanced levels only

On at least 0.5% of the farmed area there will be one or more of the following habitats to support wildlife:


  cultivated plots for ground nesting birds
  beetle banks
  ungrazed legume fallows
  supplementary winter bird feeding


Advanced level only

Habitats will be located where they can support integrated pest management, for example next to or within areas of crops.

There will be areas of tall vegetation, scrub and ponds on an additional 2% of the farmed area included in the standard.

2. Use of buffers to protect trees

Where there are in-field trees, there will be 10m buffers to protect tree roots. Any ivy, low hanging and fallen, dead or dying branches will be kept on the tree or beneath the canopy.

There will be buffers for a percentage of all trees on land in the standard, depending on the level:


  at least 50% at introductory and intermediate levels
  at least 75% at advanced level


3.  A plan to reduce nutrient losses and emissions

A nutrient management plan will ensure that applications of manure and fertiliser meet crop and soil requirements. This will reduce the impact of nutrient loading on the local environment.

Low emission technologies will be used when applying slurries, other liquid manures, and organic and composted manures. Use efficient precision application equipment to apply fertilisers and pesticides.

Intermediate and advanced levels only

There will be:


  a nutrient budget and action plan to improve efficiency of nutrient use
  soil mapping across the farm to better target nutrient applications


4. Ditch maintenance (intermediate and advanced only)

Ditch channels will be maintained no more than once every 3 years, during the autumn or winter. At least half the length of ditch bank vegetation will be left uncut in any one year.

5. Targeting nutrient and pesticide applications (advanced level only)

Efficient precision application equipment will be used to apply fertilisers and pesticides.

Arable and horticultural soils standard

The aims are listed in the arable and horticultural soils standard.

Farm woodland standard

There are 6 aims but only one level in the farm woodland standard.

1.Internal open spaces

Where the woodland is not an ancient woodland there will be 10% to 20% internal open spaces and rides, within each established woodland block. Established woodland means woodland that’s over 15 years old.

No new open space will be created in ancient woodland.

2. Woodland condition assessment

Farmers will have completed this assessment in all the woodland parcels in the standard. Each woodland parcel will contain at least one survey plot.

3. Dead wood in woodland

There will be at least 20m3 per hectare of standing and fallen dead wood within each established woodland block.

4. Newly planted trees (optional)

There will be new trees with appropriate capital items installed.

5. Young trees (optional)

Woodlands that are less than 15 years old will be well maintained.

6. Woodland threats webinar

Farmers will have attended the woodland threats webinar and taken the online test.

Hedgerows standard

There are 2 aims at introductory level, and 4 aims at intermediate and advanced levels in this standard.

1. Uncut hedgerows

Every year at least half the total length of hedges in the agreement will be left uncut.

Intermediate and advanced levels only

Every year, either at least two thirds of the total length of hedges will be left uncut, or up to half will be trimmed with the cutting height raised by 10cm each time, leaving wood for fruit and flowers to form.

2. Hedgerow trees

At introductory level, there will be an average of one hedgerow tree for every 400m along the hedgerows in the agreement.

At intermediate level, there will be an average of one hedgerow tree for every 200m along the hedgerows in the agreement.

At advanced level, there will be an average of one hedgerow tree for every 100m along the hedgerows in the agreement.

At all levels, it is acceptable for some stretches to have no trees, especially where there are ground nesting birds.

3. Short hedges (intermediate and advanced levels)

Tops of hedges shorter than 2m will be left uncut.

4. Buffer strip (intermediate and advanced levels)

Measuring from the centre of the hedge, there will be a 4m tussocky grass buffer strip beside at least 50% (intermediate) or 75% (advanced) of hedgerows.

Improved grassland standard

There are 5 aims at introductory level, 7 at intermediate level and 8 at advanced level for the improved grasslands standard.

1. Grazing fields

At introductory and intermediate levels there will be a range of grass heights. The sward will either:


  have an average height of 5cm over 75% of the area
or
  be grazed rotationally with rest periods


There will be continuous grassland cover in areas with visible historic features.

Advanced level only

The swards will be tussocky with an average height of 8cm over at least 75% of the area. The area will include patches of wild or sown flowers left to go to seed.

2. Hay and silage fields

At least a third of margins will be left uncut, encouraging flowers and seed.

Intermediate and advanced levels only

In addition to the introductory level aim, at least two-thirds of silage fields will be left uncut until the end of May, or given 8 weeks to regrow between cuts.

3. Habitat for wildlife

Field corners and small areas will be taken out of management to allow tall vegetation and scrub to develop. This area will be increased in the intermediate and advanced levels.

4. Tree buffers

Where there are in-field trees, there will be a buffer around them extending at least 2m beyond the edge of the canopy.

Any ivy, low hanging and fallen, dead or dying branches will be kept on the tree or beneath the canopy.

There will be no livestock feeding within the buffer area.

5. Nutrient management plan

Participants must have a nutrient management plan in place. The plan is there to ensure:


  manures and fertilisers meet crop and soil requirements
  nutrient loading and emissions of ammonia and greenhouse gases are reduced


Intermediate and advanced levels

In addition to the nutrient management plan, there must be a whole-farm nutrient budget that will take account of:


  nutrient inputs from feed, fertiliser and manures
  nutrient outputs in crop and livestock products


The nutrient budget will be informed by slurry, manure and soil testing that’s been done within the past 3 years.

There will be an action plan to improve the efficiency of nutrient use. This will include using low emission technologies to apply organic manures and restrict the amount of slurry in a single application to 30m3 or less per hectare.

At advanced level, the action plan will include using precision equipment for fertiliser and manure.

Advanced level only

Soil mapping will be carried out across the farm to:


  test nutrient variations in fields
  better target nutrient applications


Nutrients will be reduced to a maximum of 100kg per ha N from manures, or 50kg per ha N from inorganic fertiliser, on at least 5% of the improved grassland area, ideally where applications have typically been higher than this near watercourses.

6. Introduce or retain clover or other legumes

Intermediate level

There will be patches of clover or other legumes on 15% of improved grassland.

Advanced level only

Diverse herb and legume swards will cover at least 20% of the improved grassland area.

7. Ditch channels (intermediate and advanced levels only)

Ditch channels will be maintained no more than once every 3 years, during autumn and winter. At least half the length of ditch bank vegetation will be left uncut every year.

8. Winter bird food (advanced level only)

A small area, with high rye grass content, will be left to provide winter seed for birds.

Improved grassland soils standard

The aims are listed in the improved grassland soils standard.

Low and no input grassland standard

There are 7 aims at introductory level, 8 at intermediate and 9 at advanced for land in this standard.

1. Nutrient application

Application of inorganic fertiliser or manure will be reduced to no more than 50kg of N per hectare in total. If the current application rate is already below this, it will not be increased.

Intermediate and advanced levels

No nutrients will be applied to grazed pasture, to encourage diversity of plant species.

On fields cut for forage nutrient inputs will be further reduced to farmyard manure only, and limited to replace the nutrients lost when cut - with no more than 12 tonnes per ha

2. Grazing fields

The sward will have a range of heights. It will either:


  have an average height of 5cm over at least 75% of the area


or


  be grazed rotationally with rest periods, allowing wild or sown flowers to flower and produce seed


On priority habitat and grassland on sites of special scientific interest (SSSI), management will be adapted to the grassland type.

Intermediate and advanced levels

The sward will be tussocky with a range of heights. It will either:


  have an average height of between 8 and 12cm over at least 50% of the area


or


  be grazed rotationally with rest periods, allowing wild or sown flowers to flower and produce seed


On priority habitat and on sites of special scientific interest (SSSI), management will be adapted to the grassland type.

3. Fields cut for forage

At least a third of margins will be left uncut to encourage flowers and seed.

Intermediate and advanced levels only

In addition to the aims at introductory level, on at least 50% (for intermediate) or 75% (for advanced) of the mowing area, the crop will be:


  taken as field-dried hay or haylage
  cut when most plants have flowered and gone to seed


4. Weed and invasive species control

Weeds and invasive species will be managed by hand pulling, cutting, grazing, weed wiping or spot treatment.

5. Buffer around trees

There will be a buffer around in-field trees that extends to at least 2m beyond the edge of the canopy. Ivy, low hanging and fallen or dead branches will be kept on the tree or beneath the canopy.

There will be no livestock feeding within the buffer area.

6. Ditch channel maintenance

Ditch channels will be maintained no more than once every 3 years, during autumn and winter. At least half the length of ditch bank vegetation will be left uncut in any one year.

7. Supplementary feeding

Supplementary feeding will:


  ideally use home produced forage
  be located away from sensitive areas
  will not cause poaching, overgrazing or disturbance to ground-nesting birds


8. Tall vegetation, scrub, ponds and rush management (intermediate and advanced levels only)

There will be areas of tall vegetation and scrub and wet features such as ponds. Where these areas are less than 10% of the grassland area, more areas should be allowed to develop without grazing or cutting.

Scrub cover will be lower on historic sites, areas managed for breeding waders and on species-rich grassland.
Tussock-forming, non-jointed rushes will be limited to 30% cover or less

9. Managing wetlands (advanced level only)

Wetland areas will be improved by one of the following:


  on wetland and damp grassland, drains will be blocked to hold water in the soil and extend wetland vegetation
  on floodplain grasslands, water will be retained on fields in pools, scrapes and low areas over winter


On sites of special scientific interest (SSSI) the land will be managed to achieve ‘favourable condition’ targets for the designated feature.

Water body buffering standard

There is one aim in the water body buffering standard.

1. Dense and ungrazed grass cover

Alongside at least half of all water bodies there will be an ungrazed grass buffer strip capable of protecting water bodies from pollutants carried in field runoff. The buffer strips will measure:


  6m wide at introductory level
  6m wide for at least 20% of water bodies, at intermediate and advanced levels
  10m wide for at least 30% of water bodies, at intermediate and advanced levels


These measurements include the 2m cross-compliance buffer.

The location of the buffers will be informed by the soil and runoff assessment, and should complement field-scale actions to reduce soil compaction and runoff at source.

Advanced level only

A mixture of wild flowering plants will be established in some of the buffers to introduce more diverse rooting depths, aid good soil structure and intercept nutrients.

Further information

For more information read the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot: overview

See all the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance.




      
        
    Published 7 June 2021
    Last updated 17 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 August 2021
              The aims of the low and no input grassland standard were removed udring a previous update. This was a mistake and the current edition corrects that.
            
            
              6 August 2021
              Removed outdated descriptions of the aims of the improved grasslands soils standard and the arable and horticultural soils standard. Linked to the correct information in the standards themselves.
            
            
              5 August 2021
              Added a link to the collection of SFI guidance.
            
            
              20 July 2021
              This edition aligns the aims and the actions in the standards, and restructures some aims for clarity. 

It adds 3 aims to the improved grassland standard (habitat for wildlife, introduce clover or other legumes, and winter bird food). Some content has moved from the other aims into these aims. 

It also adds 3 aims to the low and no input grassland aims: Nutrient application, Weed and invasive species control and Tall vegetation, scrub, ponds and rush management. Some content has moved from the other aims into these aims. 

There is an additional aim in the arable and horticultural land standard - Targeting nutrient and pesticide applications (advanced level only). This brings it in line with the standard.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Improved grassland soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance
        Create 2 year sown legume fallow
        Use precision pesticide application systems
        Manage grazing on improved grassland

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Arable and horticultural land standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Arable and horticultural soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Farm woodland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Hedgerows standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Improved grassland soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot

      
        
          + 3 more
        
      

      
        
          Improved grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Low and no input grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, and Water body buffering standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Land management

  


  

  


    
  


    