
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    The Ministry of Defence Supply Base
  

  
  
  
      
  Information on the Ministry of Defence works with the Defence sector to achieve our goals.  

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      29 October 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Spending more with SMEs

        
        
          Related information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) 2015 committed the UK to spending a minimum 2% of GDP on defence over the next decade. This commitment represents spending some £178-billion on Defence Equipment and Support over that period.

In 2019/20 MOD spent nearly £21-billion with industry, accounting for almost 40% of all UK government procurement spend and representing the fifth biggest defence budget in the world.

The size and complexity of many of our projects means that we need to work closely with our suppliers to ensure delivery of the Defence programme. Below are 19 of our largest suppliers:


  Airbus
  Babcock
  BAE Systems
  Boeing
  Capita
  COBHAM
  DXC
  General Dynamics
  KBR
  Leidos
  Leonardo
  Lockheed Martin
  MBDA
  QinetiQ
  Raytheon
  Rolls-Royce
  Serco
  Thales
  Ultra Electronics.


The majority of procurement opportunities in Defence exist within the MOD supply chain (around 75%). To access as many opportunities as possible we encourage you to look at Defence supplier’s websites.
We advocate the use of competition wherever appropriate both in our direct contract opportunities and throughout the supply chain.

Opportunities therefore exist for suppliers of all sizes, from large established defence contractors through to innovative smaller businesses, to get involved in our procurement activity both as a prime supplier and as a sub-contractor.

The programmes we support are detailed in the Defence Equipment Plan 2020.

Spending more with SMEs

We recognise SMEs have a great deal to offer in promoting economic growth. We are working to help SMEs gain a greater share of defence related business.

We are improving access to our market for new, innovative suppliers and particularly smaller businesses. We want at least 25% of our procurement spend to go to SMEs both directly and indirectly by 2022.

To help achieve this goal we have developed a dedicated SME Action Plan, which reinforces our commitment to the SME Agenda, aiming to increase our overall spend with SMEs.

Our SME spend has increased steadily over the last three years, from 13.1% in Financial Year 2016/17 to 19.3% in 2018/19. Data on central government SME spend is published on GOV.UK on an annual basis.

The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory is committed to working with a wider range of innovative SMEs. This is underpinned by the SME Searchlight project, set up to attract SMEs and non-traditional defence suppliers.

Government has a commitment to obtain value for money and support small businesses and start-ups through procurement. We understand the challenges and barriers, especially for smaller firms, and are committed to tackling them. Centralised guidance for SMEs is available on the Small and Medium Business Hub.

Related information

Procurement at MOD





      
        
    Published 29 October 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence Procurement COVID-19 communications
        Supply chain opportunities
        MOD Engagement with Trade Associations
        Innovation in the Defence Supply Chain
        MOD contracting, purchasing and finance: e-procurement system

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Government
        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    