
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Statement by International Scientific Advisers ahead of COP26
  

  
  

  
    
  Senior scientific advisers from around the world sign a statement to governments on climate change

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Office for Science

      
      Published
      28 October 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers ahead of COP26
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers Ahead of COP26 - ENGLISH
    
        PDF, 403KB, 4 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers Ahead of COP26 - ARABIC
    
        PDF, 93.9KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers Ahead of COP26 - CHINESE
    
        PDF, 165KB, 2 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers Ahead of COP26 - FRENCH
    
        PDF, 118KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers Ahead of COP26 - RUSSIAN
    
        PDF, 152KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Statement by International Senior Scientific Advisers Ahead of COP26 - SPANISH
    
        PDF, 82.7KB, 3 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
A statement signed by 39 senior scientific advisers to governments from around the world and published ahead of COP26 in Glasgow demonstrates consensus on the role of science and innovation in tackling climate change. 
It calls on world leaders to do 3 things:


  develop long-term strategies to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius
  increase international collaboration to accelerate effective mitigation and adaptation solutions
  strengthen global research and innovation capacity


The statement has been signed by senior scientific advisers in: Australia, Canada, Chile, India, Italy, Japan, Kenya, New Zealand, Nigeria, South Africa, Seychelles, UK, USA, EU, Ireland, Brazil, Bangladesh, Argentina, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Portugal, Switzerland, Moldova, Philippines, Denmark, Cyprus, Estonia, Peru, Costa Rica, Botswana, Poland, Zambia, Mexico, Mauritius, Morocco, South Korea, Uruguay.

It was launched today, 28 October, by the UK’s Chief Scientific Adviser Patrick Vallance on the RRS Sir David Attenborough which is anchored on the Thames from 28-30 October. The ship will transform how ship-borne science is conducted in the polar regions and provide scientists with state-of-the-art facilities to research the oceans, seafloor, ice and atmosphere.

Speaking at the statement launch, UK Chief Scientific Adviser Patrick Vallance said:


  Science is not just necessary to diagnose the state of the planet - it is also needed to understand how to treat it. Through research, we can accelerate the technological, social and economic change needed to reach net zero.


Professor Nicole Grobert, Chair of the Group of Chief Scientific Advisors to the European Commission, said:


  Reaching carbon neutrality requires innovation, low-emission choices and active participation. Science provides solutions for improving quality of life through a fair and sustainable decarbonisation of our societies.


Dr Xavier Estico, Director General, Division of Science Technology and Innovation, Seychelles Ministry of Investment, Entrepreneurship and Industry, said:


  History has taught us that science, technology and innovation at their best helped to bring timely solutions to challenges that seemed beyond the reach of humankind. With the lessons learned, we should all collaborate in adopting the same spirit, philosophy and attitude in combating the greatest challenge of our time: Climate Change.


Professor K. VijayRaghavan, Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India, said:


  The successful transition to a carbon neutral green economy will be dependent upon generation of new scientific knowledge coupled with technological innovations. To achieve this in a time bound manner, seamless collaboration amongst nations will ensure scale, efficiency and affordability which are cardinal to this endeavour.


The Statement is available on this page in all 6 UN languages: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Spanish and Russian.

Background on RRS Attenborough

RRS Sir David Attenborough visits London this week ahead of its first Antarctic mission later this year. Berthed in the River Thames, the UK’s new polar research ship is making its London debut in support of the UK Presidency of COP26. RRS Sir David Attenborough has been undergoing sea trials around the UK and will transform how ship-borne science is conducted in the Polar Regions. Find out more about the RRS Sir David Attenborough




        
      

      
    Published 28 October 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change adaptation
        Climate change international action

  


  

  


    
  


    