
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Farming Investment Fund
  

  
  
  
      
  Information about funding for farmers, foresters, growers and contractors about grants for investing in new technology

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      16 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Farming Equipment and Technology Fund

        
        
          Farming Transformation Fund

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Farming Investment Fund (FIF) provides grants to improve productivity and bring environmental benefits. FIF is made up of 2 separate funds:


  Farming Equipment and Technology Fund (for grants between £2,000 and £25,000)
  Farming Transformation Fund (for grants between £35,000 and £500,000)


Farming Equipment and Technology Fund

This fund provides grants towards the cost of equipment and technology to improve the productivity of farms in a sustainable way.

How to apply

The Round 1 application period opens on 16 November 2021 and will close on 7 January 2022.

Read the FETF Round 1 manual for full details about who is eligible and what you can get funding for before you apply.

Apply now for a Round 1 FETF grant

FETF contact details and accessibility information

Email FETFEnquiries@rpa.gov.uk or call the RPA helpline on 03000 200 301 and select the option for the Farming Equipment and Technology Fund.

Read the FETF accessibility statement.

Farming Transformation Fund

This fund provides grants towards large capital items to help businesses improve productivity, profitability, and environmental sustainability. They are:


  Water Management
  Improving Farm Productivity
  Adding Value


Water Management grant

The Water Management grant is open for applications and will close on 12 January 2022.

Read more information about the Farming Transformation Fund Water Management grant, including how to find out if your project is eligible and how to start your application.

What happens next

RPA will assess the information you submit. If your project is suitable, you will be asked to submit a full application.

FTF contact details

Email FTF@rpa.gov.uk or call the RPA helpline on 03000 200 301 and select the option for the Farming Transformation Fund.





      
        
    Published 16 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Farming Transformation Fund    Water Management grant manual   
        Farming Equipment and Technology Fund: Round 1 manual
        Farming Transformation Fund Water Management grant
        Countryside Productivity Scheme
        Countryside Productivity Small Grant (CPSG) scheme Round 3

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Farming Investment Fund

  




      

    Collection

  


        Rural payments and grants

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Rural grants and payments

  




      

    Topical events

  


        Farming

  


  

  


    
  


    