 Are we in the midst of a cyber war?I don't like to call it cyber war because it puts people in the mindset that government is the only solution. Governments fight wars. We are in an epic cyber battle with different pieces, which are important to separate. There are still the traditional attacks by foreign adversaries against our government networks, including the .mil domains  for the military or .gov domains for civilian federal, state, and local governments. We've seen that with the security clearance hacking and with other sorts of cyber intrusions. We have to do everything we can to thwart those attacks and to make it more difficult for our systems to be vulnerable. And then we need to go on offense, which often includes both overt things, such as the naming and shaming that we've seen going on, as well as covert activities that we don't know about. Are we able to disrupt, say, Russia's military network? (Russia wouldn't admit it if we did, of course.) So, there might be all sorts of covert activities we could turn to.I think what we're seeing now is more complicated and reflects the nature of our homeland security structure, where two things are happening. The first is that our public infrastructure is owned by the private sector. So, an attack on our privately-owned infrastructure ends up having public consequences that are of concern to the government, whether it's the Colonial Pipeline attack or the disruption to our food supply. So, that's one piece. The second piece is what we call the downstream attacks, which is when cyber criminals aligned with a government attack a private entity whose downstream clients include both the private and public sector. How do you prevent or deter these newer kinds of attacks against privately-owned public infrastructure? We want to protect networks through layered defenses and cyber hygiene and all the words that we use to make ourselves safer, and to make sure that the vulnerabilities don’t exist. You want to avoid the single point of failure — the single access point that an adversary can use to get into and disrupt not just one system but downstream clients.But we also need to assume breach. We need to be better prepared for these breaches to happen. We've built an entire cybersecurity infrastructure which has sold the illusion of perfect security, and we need to rethink that. We should assume there will be breaches and ask what we have done to mitigate the impact, to ensure that we have redundancies in the supply chain, and to give ourselves more options when these events occur. When the Colonial Pipeline got breached, it only had two options: to either pay the ransomware or shut the whole thing down. That's not a sophisticated safety system. A lot of cybersecurity companies have gotten exceptionally rich selling to clients the mythology that their system can be protected and secured perfectly. But if your network is attached to anything, it's vulnerable. And you can make it less vulnerable, or you can take it offline, which is an option, but you better also know what you're doing after you assume breach....