The U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) Better Buildings Initiative promotes energy efficiency in U.S. commercial buildings through collaboration, technical assistance, and resource development in partnership with building-industry stakeholders. As a core part of this initiative, the Better Buildings Alliance focuses on technology deployment through innovative and successful . Run by the DOE Building Technologies Office’s (BTO)  program, these campaigns help new technologies gain widespread adoption and building owners achieve significant energy savings.BTO identifies technologies that have the potential to deliver significant energy-efficiency benefits and launches campaigns to deploy these technologies across thousands of buildings, stimulating the market and creating a widespread and lasting impact. Led by experts from DOE’s national labs, campaigns partner with industry to provide technical assistance, implementation guidance, and recognition of exemplary projects and practices. This deployment effort also supports follow-on research and development, tracking of savings, and identification of more market opportunities.Recognizing the need to improve the performance of the walls, windows and roofs of U.S. buildings, as well as the untapped value of integrating lighting with other building systems, the Better Buildings Alliance and its partners launched two new campaigns at the Better Buildings Summit in June 2020: the Building Envelope Campaign and the Integrated Lighting Campaign. These newly launched campaigns are actively seeking interested partners to get involved, with deadlines approaching soon.The Building Envelope Campaign (BEC) drives investment in comfortable, energy-efficient buildings by improving the performance of walls, windows, roof, and foundation—the primary thermal barrier between a building’s interior and the exterior. The campaign lays out goals for building-envelope performance, highlights energy savings opportunities, and offers direct technical support to building owners and managers.Building Envelope Campaign participants can earn recognition for new construction projects or retrofits to commercial and multifamily residential buildings. Work must have been completed after January 2019, and the deadline to enter is April 2, 2021.The Integrated Lighting Campaign (ILC) drives the adoption of energy-efficiency strategies for sensing and control in lightings, as well as the integration of lighting controls with other systems like plug loads, HVAC, daylighting, security, and photovoltaics. The Integrated Lighting Campaign provides participants with guidance, technical assistance, and access to resources, as well as recognition for innovative lighting projects.Integrated Lighting Campaign participants can earn recognition for new construction and retrofit projects in several categories of sensors and/or controls. The deadline to enter is March 22, 2021.Past technology campaigns have met with great success, saving building owners over $250 million in 2019 alone. Since 2013, past campaigns have achieved meaningful impact through 540 million square feet of high-efficiency parking lot lighting, 160,000 packaged heating/cooling unit retrofits or replacements, 2.8 million LED troffer lighting systems, and 6,500 buildings with ongoing energy analytics.BTO is actively seeking participation in the Building Envelope and Integrated Lighting Campaigns. For more information, please visit the  and .