
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Help to Grow: Digital – apply to become a vendor
  

  
  
  
      
  How to apply to provide digital technologies under the Help to Grow: Digital scheme if you're a software vendor.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      29 July 2021
      Last updated
      
        9 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Applications for wave 1 are now closed

        
        
          Overview

        
        
          
SME eligibility

        
        
          Vendor eligibility for wave 1

        
        
          Product eligibility for wave 1

        
        
          Product assessment

        
        
          What the grant token covers

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          After you’ve applied

        
        
          Help and guidance

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          







Applications for wave 1 are now closed

If your application is successful you can update and complete your product information online.

If you would like information on future waves of the scheme or you would like to register your interest, please email vendors.helptogrow@beis.gov.uk.

Please include in your email:


  your company name
  your contact email and phone number
  any other information you would like to provide



The eligibility and product criteria below apply to wave 1 only. We will review and update the eligibility criteria ahead of future waves.

Overview

Help to Grow: Digital is a new UK-wide scheme to help small and medium size businesses (SMEs) adopt digital technologies that are proven to increase their productivity.

The scheme will offer SMEs free and impartial advice on how technology can help their business. An online platform will help them to:


  identify their digital technology needs
  assess technology purchasing options
  implement new technologies in their operations


The scheme will also offer eligible SMEs a grant token worth up to £5,000 to cover up to half of the costs of pre-approved, digital technology solutions.

The Help to Grow: Digital scheme will be launched in the Autumn. It will run for 3 years, taking a phased approach over a number of waves. Each wave will provide the opportunity to roll out new technologies and functionalities for SMEs and vendors.


SME eligibility

SMEs eligible for the grant token will:


  be registered in the UK at Companies House
  employ between 5 and 249 employees
  have been trading for more than 12 months



Eligible SMEs will be able to claim a grant token for one technology product only for wave 1.


Information collected during the vendor and product application and assessment process will be used to support elements of the SME journeys and their participation in the scheme. This may include but not be limited to:


  help and guidance content on the website to support SMEs in terms of how to buy and make decisions in relation to products that are suitable and fit for purpose for their specific circumstances
  diagnostic tools to enable SMEs to self-assess their situation
  a product comparison tool that will use standardised data to enable a side-by-side comparison of vendors and their approved products (vendors will be required to provide additional information if they’re eligible)


We will provide more information about SME eligibility later in the year.

Vendor eligibility for wave 1

Eligible vendors will:


  be registered in the UK at Companies House
  have been trading for at least 12 months
  be a producer and vendor of eligible technologies (we are not accepting resellers or partner networks for wave 1)
  demonstrate cyber security compliance
  have an active GDPR policy


You will need to undergo fraud checks in line with the terms and conditions (PDF) of the scheme.

You will need to put in place additional technical capabilities to comply with the grant token requirements.

Product eligibility for wave 1

The 3 technology types eligible for wave 1 are:


  accounting
  customer relationship management (CRM)
  e-commerce


You will need to demonstrate that eligible products:


  are 1 of the 3 technology types eligible for wave 1
  can be purchased through a complete online retail buying journey in a self-service capacity, at the time of the application
  have a listed price without the need for a negotiated sales process
  have out of the box functionality with minimum configuration required (the product should have business ready processes, screens, and data requirements available as a default solution)
  meet minimum functionality criteria
  have an existing UK SME customer base, illustrating that it’s supporting UK SMEs

  provide the expected functionality and capability provided in a stand-alone solution
  demonstrate adherence to cyber security protection measures
  are sold as a software solution (either as a Software as a Service (SaaS) or on-premise solution including monthly subscription, annual or multi-year contract) and not as a pay per use service
  have a verifiable history of use (over 12 months) by SMEs using customer retention rates
  are endorsed by customers through the use of public rating sites (G2 or Capterra)


In addition:


  accountancy software products should demonstrate compliance with Making Tax Digital for VAT

  e-commerce products must be provided as standalone software enabling the SME to publish their own commerce presence and storefront online


All eligibility criteria listed above must be met at time of application. Applications will not be considered where the vendor must make changes to products or processes to make them eligible as part of wave 1.

This eligibility criteria applies to wave 1 only. We will review and update the eligibility criteria ahead of future waves.

Excluded products

For wave 1, accounting, CRM or e-commerce must be the core capability provided by eligible products and not a module within a larger product ecosystem.

Products not eligible for wave 1 of the scheme include:


  enterprise resource planning (ERP) solutions that provide accounting capability within a modular solution
  add-ons and integrated solutions that extend capability following an ecosystem approach (this applies to all technologies that take a similar modular approach to providing capabilities or have an app marketplace that sells add-on components developed by independent software vendors or partners (ISVs/ISPs))
  single product ‘business management solutions’ targeting fuller operational capability and broader functional coverage providing capability for end-to-end operational management
  existing marketplace ‘seller accounts’ that allow an SME to publish and sell their product catalogue
  services that involve paying for one-off, per-use delivery of the capability on an ongoing ‘whenever used’ basis, such as transactional costs or service execution


This is not an exhaustive list of excluded software types or packages. You should consider how your product fits against all eligibility criteria when submitting your applications.

This eligibility criteria applies to wave 1 only. We intend to bring additional technology categories into the scheme in future waves.

Product assessment

The scheme intends to include high quality products that have a track record of meeting UK SME customer needs and improving productivity. Products will need to meet the eligibility criteria set out in the guidance. They will also need to demonstrate an existing UK SME base that are successfully using the products, through the use of UK SME users and retention rates data and information from external product review sites.

In determining eligibility, products will be assessed against defined lists of minimum standard capabilities. An eligible product must compare favourably against the expected minimum requirements.

Advanced capabilities may also be included as part of products offered via the scheme, but will not be used to determine eligibility.

This eligibility criteria applies to wave 1 only. We will review and update the eligibility criteria ahead of future waves.

What the grant token covers

The Help to Grow: Digital scheme will offer eligible SMEs up to £5,000 to cover up to half of the costs of pre-approved, digital technology solutions for 12 months.

The ‘voucher’ originally described in the announcement of the scheme will be referred to legally as a ‘grant token’. (Further work is underway with SMEs to determine what language works best for them to successfully engage them in the scheme).

The grant token will be redeemable with eligible vendors, for approved products. It will be for vendors to calculate and provide the discount when an SME makes an eligible purchase, in line with the terms and conditions (PDF). It will be the vendors responsibility to seek reimbursement for the value of the grant token.

The grant token will cover:


  12 months of eligible product core costs (as set out above) exclusive of VAT



Vendors will be expected to price any eligible products listed through Help to Grow: Digital in line with pricings on their public websites.

SMEs should have access to any free trials offered to customers through their public site. Any free trial period will not count towards the 12-month grant token discount period.

SMEs should have access to any discount periods offered to customers through their public site. These discount periods will be included within the 12-month grant token discount period.

The grant token will not cover:


  VAT
  implementation (planning or delivery) services
  vendor professional services beyond what might be included as standard or that are incurred at additional cost
  support package uplifts that are provided at additional cost and provide more than the standard vendor support model
  scenarios not adhering to the approved upgrade options
  training (end user or technical) beyond what might be included as standard or that are incurred at additional cost
  infrastructure costs (for on-premise solutions or private cloud options whether externally hosted, or deployed within the customer SME data centre and where infrastructure costs are separate)
  extensions to the standard product capacity limitations
  application management services provided by the vendor or a third-party to support system administration and overall operational support and management of the product
  back-up and recovery tools or services related to customer data management if the back-up and recovery services the vendor would be providing as part of delivering their cloud-based service does not include customer data
  business continuity or disaster recovery solutions
  other ineligible products being procured from the vendor at the same time as the eligible product (add-ons)
  products developed by partners or independent solution vendors (ISVs) intended to work with the core product and sold as integrated components or via a vendor app store or marketplace
  multiple eligible products


How to apply


Applications for wave 1 are now closed.


We will review and update this guidance ahead of future waves.

After you’ve applied

Vendors will be notified about the outcome of their application by 8 October 2021.

If your application is successful

If your application is successful you will be given additional information on technical requirements and grant token redemption.

Find out about next steps.

If your application is unsuccessful

For those applications which are unsuccessful there will be routes available to:


  lodge an appeal
  make a complaint


We will not accept a second application for the same product if it’s assessed to be ineligible for the scheme. If this happens to your product and you disagree with the assessment you will have the option to appeal the decision.

Help and guidance

If you have any questions, contact the Help to Grow: Digital team:


Help to Grow: Digital scheme enquiries 1 Victoria Street London SW1H 0ET United Kingdom Email: vendors.helptogrow@beis.gov.uk


We are unable to respond promptly to letters sent in the post at the moment. Please email to ensure we can respond to your enquiry as quickly as possible.





      
        
    Published 29 July 2021
    Last updated 9 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 September 2021
              Applications for wave 1 of the scheme are now closed.
            
            
              26 August 2021
              Updated to clarify that the Making Tax Digital requirement for accountancy software relates to VAT only.
            
            
              29 July 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Manage your technology vendor account
        Growing your business
        Get help and support for your business

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Running a business

  


  

  


    
  


    