Six McKinsey colleagues were among them: our global managing partner Kevin Sneader, senior partner Cornelius Baur, North America managing partner Liz Hilton Segel, senior partner Dame Vivian Hunt, McKinsey Accelerate global leader Daniel Pacthod, and Asia offices chairman Oliver Tonby. Against the backdrop of the global pandemic, each joined dozens of sessions on urgent matters like climate change, diversity and inclusion, the future of work and manufacturing, and much more. Throughout the week, we also announced new WEF partnerships. We committed to be one of 61 leading organizations that will share metrics focused on “people, planet, prosperity, and governance” as part of the  initiative. And McKinsey became a founding member of the forum’s  initiative, a new global coalition dedicated to fighting racism in the workplace. “McKinsey is proud to be a founding member of this new coalition,” Kevin said of the anti-racism initiative, “that is working to tackle issues of racial injustice in the workplace and identify solutions that work across the globe.”To hear more from Kevin and the rest of our delegation on a Davos like no other, read on.This was evident in various sessions. Heads of government lined up to encourage and commit to action. Presidents Macron and Xi along with Chancellor Merkel used their remarks to urge multilateral action. Asset owners such as Larry Fink made sweeping commitments to push for institutions to take action and put their own houses in order. And CEOs responded with much discussion of the paths they would take to ensure they helped achieve the Paris climate accords or better.Digital is the essential prerequisite for growth. The South African President spoke about the continent’s hunger for digital, and in India, more than six million people were trained on digital during the pandemic. Meanwhile, accelerating the introduction of industry 4.0 technology raised concerns about a potential uptick in unemployment, which could generate massive public frustration in certain markets. This made the importance of reskilling abundantly clear: at-risk workers must be quickly upskilled and given new hope in these situations.In a CEO discussion convened by Fortune, we heard from business leaders on the most important changes they are making to emerge stronger from the challenges of the past year. Responses ranged from reskilling and retraining employees to meeting the shifting needs of consumers to fostering a more flexible, empathetic, and connected workforce in our hybrid work world. Elsewhere, conversations covered the new social contract of business and the importance of collaboration at a local level to make a difference. My conversations made clear this week that we are still facing a global crisis on several fronts; we may be over the worst in some cases, but we continue to face huge choices with regards to our shared and interconnected recovery. When it comes to the health of people globally, the steps we take towards a global and equitable vaccine rollout are critical and will have a huge impact. Meanwhile, on the economic front, there has been a huge focus on rebuilding through a stakeholder capitalism lens. The ESG agenda was integrated into all aspects of the Davos Agenda in a way that is unprecedented (at least in my experience). The crisis has created and accelerated inequality in the workplace and beyond, and business leaders have a responsibility to make better choices on inclusive growth, green growth, and strong interconnections globally.   in Glasgow this November. Leaders also talked about rethinking economic and social systems to help those who need it most, especially in the form of job creation, and accelerating the tech transformation for the good of society. What happened in the last 12 months in vaccines is remarkable; and while the bio-revolution is the next unlock, the focus has to remain on “tech for the good of society.”Finally, there were discussions on the need for a new multi-lateral system that is fair and takes into account the geopolitical, economic, and human necessities of the 21st century. A key facet of that society would put public trust on the front burner; across all the sessions, public- and private-sector leaders realize the need to re-establish trust and engage the younger generations.In the COVID-19 era, three attributes matter when it comes to business growth. The first is speed. The pace of tech innovation among companies, workers, consumers, and citizens has accelerated. The second is collaboration, which we see in the case of organizations working together to solve big problems. And the third is resilience. The pandemic has created a situation where going forward, it may now be unthinkable to make a big move without first asking an important question: how pandemic-proof is this? 