
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Carbon Capture, Usage and Storage (CCUS) Innovation 2.0 competition: guidance and how to apply
  

  
  

  
    
  £19.5 million in grant funding will be available for projects developing novel CCUS technology and processes that reduce the cost of deployment. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      24 May 2021
      Last updated
      
        26 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    CCUS Innovation 2.0 competition, call 1: guidance
    
        PDF, 1.26MB, 70 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Competition questions and answers
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    CCUS Innovation 2.0 competition, call 1: application form
    
        MS Word Document, 124KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    CCUS Innovation 2.0 competition, call 1: project cost breakdown form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 112KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    CCUS Innovation 2.0 competition, call 1: project plan and finance tables
    
        XLSM, 63.4KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    CCUS Innovation 2.0 competition, call 1: additional project partner form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 26.8KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) is looking to support the deployment of advanced carbon capture, usage and storage (CCUS) technologies within the UK, as announced in the Ten point plan for a green industrial revolution.

How the competition will work

Up to £19.5 million grant funding will be available over 2 calls to:


  support innovation in novel CCUS technology increasing its technology and commercial readiness level (TRL & CRL)
  demonstrate and de-risk next generation CCUS technologies to allow it to deploy commercially from 2025
  reduce the cost of deploying CCUS and create competitive pressure on current available technology


Projects will be split into 2 lots:


  
Lot 1 Mid Stage CCUS innovation for projects developing and piloting mid-stage (TRL 3-5) CCUS innovation. For Lot 1 BEIS will consider grant applications of up to £1 million
  
Lot 2 Late Stage CCUS innovation for projects developing late-stage (TRL 6-8) CCUS technology, particularly demonstrating at intermediate (~100 tonnes CO2 per day) scale or greater at site. For Lot 2 BEIS will consider grant applications of up to £5 million


The CCUS Innovation 2.0 competition is part of the £1 billion Net Zero Innovation Portfolio (NZIP).

How to apply



  
Submit Lot 1 applications by 23:59pm 29 August 2021

  
Submit Lot 2 applications by 23:59pm 26 September 2021




If you intend to apply, you must confirm via email to industry.innovation@beis.gov.uk, providing the following information:


  organisation name of lead applicant


and whether you are applying to:


  Lot 1 (up to £1 million grant funding for mid-stage (~TRL 3-5) CCUS innovation projects), or
  Lot 2 (up to £5m grant funding for late-stage (~TRL 6-8) CCUS innovation projects)


Industry Engagement Day

We hosted an online Industry Engagement Day on 16 June 2021.

We will not now publish the recording of the webinar and slides as the competition guidance has changed slightly since the event.

Further information

We have updated the questions and answers page here with responses questions submitted before 18 July 2021.

If you need additional information or have any questions, please email industry.innovation@beis.gov.uk using the subject line: CCUS Innovation 2.0.




        
      

      
    Published 24 May 2021
    Last updated 26 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 August 2021
              Corrected a formatting error in the project cost breakdown form.
            
            
              19 August 2021
              Deadline for submitting lot 2 applications changed to 26 September 2021.
            
            
              12 August 2021
              We have updated the competition questions and answers document. Read the document for a full list of answers that have been updated.
            
            
              30 July 2021
              Question and answer page updated, including responses to anonymised questions received since.
            
            
              14 July 2021
              Added the application link and a set of competition questions and answers.
            
            
              6 July 2021
              Guidance and how to apply details added ready for the competition opening on 12 July 2021.
            
            
              24 May 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply Competition (closed)
        Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition
        Industrial Energy Efficiency Accelerator (IEEA)
        Register your interest for Phase 3 of the Industrial Energy Efficiency Accelerator
        Green Home Finance Accelerator

  




      

    Collection

  


        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Greenhouse gas emissions
        Low carbon technologies

  


  

  


    
  


    