Workflow for digitized control delivery process, bridging model-based design with Spawn of EnergyPlus with formal end-to-end verification. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory – Berkeley, CA
-- Carrier Corp. – Palm Beach Gardens, FL
-- Automated Logic Corp. – Kennesaw, GA $1,000,000$500,000 $1,000,000 September 1, 2020 – September 30, 2022 Cooperative Research and Development Agreement – 2021 Lab CallModel-based development can be used to design, deploy, and configure building energy control systems for increased efficiency, indoor air quality, resilience, and flexibility. This project will establish a new workflow at Carrier and Automated Logic for model-based design, deployment, automatic configuration and verification of next-generation control systems. These new systems use an open digital format for control logic and an open semantic model for system configuration.This project will increase the efficiency and IAQ of commercial buildings, reduce the cost and time for installations of controls, system-level FDD and energy analytics, and accelerate the development of new control solutions for existing and new commercial buildings. Collectively, they will enable a large labor pool to install and configure high-performance controls, FDD, and energy analytics through a formal rigorous digitized process based on emerging ASHRAE standards.  Marco Pritoni and Michael Wetter, Lawrence Berkeley National LaboratoryMichael Wetter, Paul Ehrlich, Antoine Gautier, Milica Grahovac, Philip Haves, Jianjun Hu, Anand Prakash, Dave Robin and Kun Zhang.  Energy, Volume 238, Part A, January 2022. Michael Wetter, Jianjun Hu, Anand Prakash, Paul Ehrlich, Gabe Fierro, Milica Grahovac, Marco Pritoni, Lisa Rivalin, Dave Robin. Modelica-json: Transforming energy models to digitize the control delivery process. Buildings Simulation 2021. Brugge, Belgium. September 2021.Michael Wetter, Milica Grahovac and Jianjun Hu. Control Description Language. 1st American Modelica Conference, Cambridge, MA, USA, August 2018. Fierro G., Prakash A., Mosiman C., Pritoni M., Raftery P., Wetter M., and Culler D. (2020). Shepherding Metadata Through the Building Lifecycle. In The 7th ACM International Conference on Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings, Cities, and Transportation (BuildSys ’20), November 18–20, 2020, Virtual Event, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. Pritoni, M.; Paine, D.; Fierro, G.; Mosiman, C.; Poplawski, M.; Saha, A.; Bender, J.; Granderson, J. (2021). Metadata Schemas and Ontologies for Building Energy Applications: A Critical Review and Use Case Analysis. Energies 2021, 14, 2024. 