
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Extracting Data from Archives: Best Practice Guide
  

  
  

  
    
  This guide provides an overview of the stages to consider when extracting location data from archive material.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Geospatial Commission and Cabinet Office

      
      Published
      16 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        12 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Extracting Data from Archives: Best Practice Guide
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Extracting Data from Archives: Best Practice Guide
    
        PDF, 1.6MB, 17 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email geospatialcommission@cabinetoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            


The primary focus of this work is the extraction of geospatial data held by the Geo6 partner bodies: the British Geological Survey, Coal Authority, HM Land Registry, Ordnance Survey, UK Hydrographic Office and Valuation Office Agency. However, the guidance is applicable to all those working with archive data in both the public and private sector.

An organisation may take years to develop experience of the stages and the resources required to digitise archive collections such as maps and hand written documents. This guide is designed to provide a high-level overview of the considerations and stages to take into account when designing a project to extract location data from archive materials. The intended audience is those new to extracting data from archives.

This guide is intended to promote the development of data extraction pipelines. It is not intended as a guide to working with specific or specialist data types.



Extracting Data from Archives: Best Practice Guide



        
      

      
    Published 16 December 2020
    Last updated 12 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              12 November 2021
              Adding an explainer video
            
            
              16 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Best practice guidance and tools for geospatial data managers

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    