Venture Capital (VC) is in the business of making educated guesses for financial returns. It requires an understanding of the requisites that make a startup succeed and a creative vision of the unknown. Most startups involve some combination of developing technology, undeveloped markets, scarce resources, new teams, unknown product-market fit, and new business models. Given the uncertainty generated from these circumstances, VCs rely on pattern recognition, diligence, and scenario-building to make informed decisions in the interest of their LPs.Yet, the decisions VCs are making do not just impact LPs, founders, or customers. Instead, the decisions to fund and support various types of technology or innovation impact everyone in society. Indeed, venture-backed startups affect not only how we work, live, and move, but also jobs, the environment, the economy, democracy, human rights, privacy, and safety. Investors in these companies have massive responsibility in how our society is shaped, though they are rarely held accountable for the negative aspects of those outcomes.That said, a growing number of investors and startups have started to consider not just the financial returns, but also the impact and ESG (Environmental, Social and Governance) risks of their decisions, like other asset classes and publicly traded companies have before them. According to estimates, over $30 trillion in assets under management are invested using sustainable strategies such as ESG. There are rating agencies, methodologies, and frameworks to assist investors in analyzing returns, in addition to intended and immediate impact, and to evaluate, measure, and report risks. This results in an abundance of data, frameworks, tools, and a long list of impact considerations for companies to measure.Despite the abundance of tools, there are gaps in these analyses. ESG and impact approaches, as they now stand, do not typically work for VC-backed early-stage technology companies primarily because of their evolving business models and products. In addition, there are limited methodologies to help startups or VCs plan for the possible negative consequences or anticipation of harms as a result of their respective technologies. We believe it is not only the responsibility of the founders or regulators to assess what the negative effects will be on society, but also the responsibility of investors who take credit for innovation, but not the risks. For this reason, we created a software tool, the Venture Capital Public Purpose Indicator (VCPPI) to help VCs and startups anticipate harms and reduce business risks.The Venture Capital Public Purpose Indicator and this accompanying playbook provide guidance to VCs and startups that are interested in preventing negative consequences and in laying a public purpose foundation. They can be used alongside other existing diligence or planning processes.  ...and how is it different from ESG or impact?ESG is a term used to consider environmental, social and governance risks and internal decision-making factors at a company. There are several different ESG factors and metrics, including industry-specific key issues such as climate change, human capital, labor management, corporate governance, gender diversity, privacy, and data security. ESG investing grew exponentially starting in 2004-2005, when 50 CEOs of major financial institutions and corporations came together with the United Nations (UN) to embed environmental, social and governance risk reduction factors in capital markets for better businesses, more sustainable markets and better outcomes for society. Historically, ESG—sometimes referred to as triple bottom line (people, planet, profits) investing—has been used for publicly traded assets, with private funds recently embracing ESG metrics. ESG was not directly developed for early-stage technology-first companies. Impact investing refers to capital that supports a company or product that intends to have a positive impact on society. Impact investing is often used in early-stage companies to illustrate that a company can make financial returns, as well as generate a positive impact on society. Impact investing does not always consider downside risks or negative impacts on society.VC + Public Purpose looks at social, technological, and economic challenges in the long-term utilizing 6 themes: the environment, labor and inequality, privacy and security, diversity and inclusion, governance and anti-corruption, and long-term value creation. It combines aspects of ESG and impact investing, considering both internal decisions of technology companies and the external outcomes of these companies, while anticipating any possible negative consequences on society. VC + Public Purpose research is specifically built for venture-backed, early-stage technology-based startups. The evaluation process should lead to structured conversations between impact or generalists investors and startups during diligence, a pivot, or rapid growth. It, therefore, emphasizes the foundation that a startup is building and on the plans they will have for public purpose in the future. Our approach takes into consideration the uncertain and evolving nature of early-stage technology-first companies and aims to contribute to performance, for public purpose can be an economic driver as it relates to growth, profitability, competitive advantage, and liquidity. Rising economic instability, inequality, increasing climate crises, public health crises, national security issues, disinformation, online and offline hate crimes, lack of privacy and security of personal identifiable data, mass surveillance, racial injustice and an overwhelming lack of diversity and inclusion in STEM. These are just some areas of society that are almost always objectively considered harmful—for the economy, individuals, and the future. Politicians and regulators attempt to create solutions and, often, point the finger at the next person to blame. Major social media CEOs have been questioned by Congress and by journalists on their products and business strategies; economists have analyzed monopoly power and rent-seeking; and social scientists have written books exposing the harmful or predatory behavior of technology. Rarely, however, do we talk about the responsibility of investors when it comes to their involvement with life-altering technology, influential companies, and the knowledge that they need to be better investors—for the sake of everyone, not just their LPs.The existence of responsible investing and ESG is due, in part, to investors asking, “How can I do good and do well?” The business cases have been made. Companies perform better financially when they have strong ESG performance and diverse employees. Considering public purpose, ESG, or impact is time- and capacity-intensive, but can result in a reduction of legal costs, better public relations, foresight around regulation, improved talent recruitment and retention, potential moats against competitors, lower loan and credit default swap spreads and higher credit ratings.Beyond just doing the “right thing,” or doing so for possible compliance or regulations, VCs should be interested in public purpose because  investors are expecting it. According to a Morgan Stanley survey of 110 global institutional asset owners, 95 percent are integrating or considering integrating sustainable investing in all or part of their portfolios—signaling a demand from Limited Partners (LPs). On the other side of the equation, in oversubscribed rounds for startups, founders and CEOs are picking investors who align the most on values and mission, often demonstrated by their fund’s public purpose, ESG, or impact thesis.An innovation ecosystem is beneficial for the general public and capitalism only when everyone has access to it and the technology that derives from it does more good than harm. The efforts that brought us to the moon, as well as gave us computers, the internet, cell phones, and vaccines, all occurred first due to an understanding of public purpose and value, which only then were followed by science and innovation. The “move fast and break things’’ era from Silicon Valley has departed from these values, thereby creating a lot of harm. Innovation can be slower, more thoughtful and tested for the effects—both positive and negative—on multiple stakeholders. As innovators, we should create plans against harm and not just rely on regulators to protect us. We should be creating systemic and innovative solutions to hard problems, in addition to creating wealth and returns.Over 6 months, we spoke to approximately 40 startup investors across geographies in North America, the European Union (EU), Asia and Israel, with fund sizes ranging from $20M to $10B+ AUM and focus areas across Artificial Intelligence (AI), climate, fintech, deep tech, impact, marketplaces, SaaS and consumer tech. Some of the investors we spoke with are generalists, invest through an accelerator, or are from corporate VC; others are public sector investors, investing only in diverse founders, and fewer than 10% invest under an explicit impact thesis as a directive from their LPs. In our conversations, we discussed how these individuals and firms:We also asked:From these conversations, a few themes and observations have shown up consistently and informed how we mapped our VCPPI tool.  For ESG or impact investors, frameworks help identify criteria and metrics that merit consideration. Some frameworks include methodologies for how to rank or score performance against these criteria and metrics. There are hundreds of frameworks, rating agencies and methodologies, ranging from those establishing high-level goals to those targeting a narrow component of public purpose such as climate. (See Appendix D for a non-exhaustive list of ESG and Impact tools, frameworks, startups and agencies.) The myriad of existing ESG organizations currently available can often be a source of . Still, if used correctly and at the appropriate stage of a company, these resources can deliver value in holding corporations and their investors accountable. After analyzing more than 20 different investing frameworks, predominantly focused on ESG, we have identified several trends:The amount of insight that these frameworks produce has been fostering the development of platforms like Metric,, and , which are specifically invested in analyzing large data sets against ESG criteria in order to monitor and optimize organizations’ impact on people and the planet. However, existing ESG frameworks and their spillovers still fall short of covering crucial aspects of public purpose for some companies.Summary of where ESG or impact frameworks fall short: The Venture Capital and Public Purpose Indicator is a tool that helps venture capitalists and early-stage startups assess their company and technology for public purpose, specifically around negative consequences. VCPPI will help VCs evaluate their portfolios to ensure startups are planning ahead for business and public risks related to the environment, labor & inequality, privacy & security, diversity & inclusion, governance & anti-corruption and long-term value creation. This tool can be used by generalist investors, in addition to impact investors.The 3 sections to the Venture Capital and Public Purpose IndicatorVCs score the responses from the startups based upon their own risk and public purpose profile. The outcome of the tool is to show public purpose improvement over time and to create a checklist of items a VC and startup should discuss before, during, and after an investment.If you are interested in a demo of the VC + Public Purpose Indicator, please visit our . Below are the 6 themes and corresponding questions we focused on for our research and the first section of the VCPPI tool.Most of the questions that we ask below are qualitative and, given the nature of technology startups and their evolving models and decisions, these questions investigate decisions the CEOs have made in the past, how they are currently thinking about decisions and what their plans are for the future. Ideally, these questions would be customized depending on the type of technology and stage of a startup. The purpose of these questions is to anticipate decisions a startup may face and to allow VCs and startups to get on the same page regarding their public purpose intentions. We have provided reasoning, resources and additional reading for each of the sample questions. Evaluates a startup’s effect on the world’s environmental issues, as well as that of the world’s environmental issues impact on a startup’s intended business model.What kind of resources or materials are you currently dependent on throughout your supply chain? What kind of materials could you become dependent on in the next 5 years?Overexploitation of any materials and resources has long-lasting consequences on water supply, food, public health and risks of natural disasters. It also contributes to a decline in economic growth.How can executive, judicial and legislative climate-related regulations or international treaties impact your business model over the next 5-10 years?Climate policy or regulation on a domestic and international scale can either provide ample opportunity for startups or impede growth and a startup’s plans to make money.How do the effects of climate change (water and food vulnerability, rising temperatures, sea level rise, extreme weather) affect your core business model now and in the future?Startups may experience operational impacts from extreme weather to supply shortages. Startups can also be exposed to transition risks arising from responses to climate change, such as changes in technologies, markets and regulation.Does your company directly impact a system related to climate (food, water, waste, energy)? If yes, is the system dysfunctional? Why or why not.Fast-paced change related to urbanization or climate change generates uncertainty on already vulnerable systems. If a company directly impacts food, water, waste or energy infrastructure, one should ensure that it is in improving it, not making the system more vulnerable.Where does your company stand on sustainability efforts relative to your competitors?Having strong sustainability efforts can differentiate a startup’s strategy from their competitors, particularly if they are consumer-facing or in a market in which climate-related regulations are increasing.  Assesses how a startup creates sustainable jobs and provides a livable wage, reduces wealth and income inequality and provides dignified labor with benefits.What percentage of your workers are full-time vs. part-time vs. contractors?Being classified as either an employee or a contractor can determine whether workers have access to appropriate pay, benefits and protection from discrimination. Full investment in employees reduces turnover and possible legal battles.Does your business model rely on low-wage or gig labor at any point in your supply chain? What percentage of your workers has access to paid time off, healthcare and other benefits?Workers include gig, part-time, contractors and any other employees. In New York alone, earnings are so low for gig employees that 27 percent are covered by Medicaid, while 20 percent do not have any health insurance coverage. The occupational fatality rate for gig workers is over three times as great as it is for private payroll employees.Does your company pay all workers, including part-time and contractors, a fair and livable wage ($16.54/hour) in the U.S.?A living wage can be calculated by the MIT living wage calculator. Gig worker’s equivalent hourly wage is roughly at the 10th percentile of all wage and salary workers’ wages, earning less than what 90 percent of workers earn, with some studies showing 74% of Uber drivers, for example, earn less than the minimum wage in their state.What is the possible impact that your company will have on existing job markets (domestic and international, skilled and unskilled, blue collar and white collar) over the next 10 years? What kind of work could be displaced by the company?Innovation could lead to job growth, but could also displace industries. New tech, in concert with economic incentives, policy choices and institutional forces will alter the jobs available and the skills they demand. It’s important to understand how shifts in labor will impact companies and how innovation will shift labor.Pre-COVID, what percentage of your workers were hired from the local economy in which you are located?Increasing economic mobility in economically immobile cities or for underserved populations means creating opportunities (jobs, training, etc.) locally and adds to the overall economic growth of an area.  Determines how much a startup centers privacy and security related to human rights, civil liberties and democracy in the development of their product and company.Is any part of your company’s technology observing behaviors from any stakeholder? If yes, does the surveillance limit work autonomy, diminish well-being and/or limit workers’ and the public’s privacy? How are the stakeholders made aware of this observation?Surveillance limits the opportunity to present oneself in the manner of one’s choosing. It is hence limiting on individual autonomy, impacting how individuals interact with the world. Constant observation also infringes on privacy, a dimension of one’s personality deserving positive protection. International human rights law frameworks should be applied to ensure that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are not infringed upon. Users who are being surveilled should be notified with enough time and information to enable them to challenge the surveillance decision or seek other remedies.Which data/privacy policies (GDPR, HIPAA) currently impact your company? Are there other policies or norms that could impact the company, such as increased privacy laws in the U.S. or expected product disclosures?HIPAA, CCPA and the broad adoption and enforcement of GDPR impact how some companies do business or develop models or products. With members of Congress releasing over 20 comprehensive information privacy bills or drafts, the U.S. will continue to debate privacy issues, and data companies should be aware of the operational and technical impacts of these bills.Does your company use systems that make inferences and predictions about sensitive characteristics, behaviors and thoughts or rely on highly automated decision-making? If so, how is the company ensuring there are not mistaken results or reliance on profiling?As of 2015, the outcomes of upward of 25 national elections in the world were being determined by Google’s search engine due, in part, to its predictive profiling. Predictive technology is typically biased against Black, Indigenous Peoples and People of Color. There needs to be clear governance for algorithmic transparency and accountability, allowing users to understand the overall system and to challenge any particular outcome.If collecting any data, does your company sell the data that you are collecting? If not, are there any plans to monetize data down the road? If yes, who are you selling the data to?Large data collection can result in pricing discrimination, users remaining unaware of their data being sold to 3rd parties, not receiving compensation for their data and exploitation of marginalized communities. Users should be aware if their data is being collected and monetized, and they should have control of their data. Companies should publicly commit to the privacy of their users.Does your company currently have an Access or Audit Log in place to track who has viewed any pieces of the company’s data?Having detailed audit logs helps companies monitor data and keep track of potential security breaches or internal misuses of information. They help to ensure that users follow all documented protocols and also assist in preventing and tracking down fraud.  Helps a startup analyze the accessibility of their technology, in addition to assessing the internal decision-making that impacts recruiting and retaining diverse talent, while providing an inclusive environment that prioritizes mental health.What is the demographic (ability/ age/race/gender/education level/etc.) breakdown of your company’s target customer or user?Products should be used successfully by people of all different abilities, races, genders, ages and education levels. Building products with technology accessibility in mind provides access to larger markets and compliance with accessibility laws.What practices does your company have in place to continue to evaluate product accessibility?Staying current on testing methods and tools to test websites, software and electronic documents helps conform with the Revised 508 Standards.Is there any difference between the end users and those people with buying power?If a company has a customer that is different from its final user, it is necessary to understand and align the interests of all the buyers and users. What works for the customer (buying power) might not necessarily work for the person directly impacted (user) and could create harm. Understanding the difference can also lead to improved products.Does your company engage in any internal or external initiatives to reduce discrimination, including initiatives for hiring and recruitment that consider age, race, gender, sexuality, ability, nationality, etc.? Does your company currently sponsor visas?Based on survey results from more than 1,300 employees, almost half said that they would leave their current job for a more inclusive company (defined as embracing all people, making one feel valued and feel they belong in their organization). It is unlawful discrimination to require job applicants to have a particular citizenship status or immigration status. Employment opportunities should generally be available to all individuals who are authorized to work in the United States, including U.S. citizens, permanent residents, asylees, refugees and temporary residents.Does your company provide resources for workers to ensure that they are prioritizing their mental health as it relates to depression, anxiety, substance abuse, mood disorders, etc.?Nearly 1 in 5 US adults aged 18 or older (18.3%, or 44.7 million people) reported a mental illness in 2016. In addition, 71% of adults reported at least one symptom of stress, such as feeling overwhelmed or anxious. Workplace wellness programs can identify those at risk, connect them to treatment and put in place supports to help reduce and manage stress.  Understanding the evolution of startup governance over time and the complex stakeholders who often have overlapping and shifting roles on boards, while also minimizing corruption and undue market power.How does your company externally influence the market that they are working within (participating in coalitions, lobbying, etc.)?If policy impacts a business model, it is common for companies to participate in lobbying or PACs. Lobbying can lead to an increase in shareholder returns in the short run, but can also reduce overall economic growth and lead to monopolistic situations—reducing quality and increasing prices for customers. Pushing competitors out too early can also reduce the size of a market and impact fundraising or customer acquisition capabilities.What is your company’s process if it discovers any unethical behavior (stealing, rule violation, lying, bribery, control, bullying, discrimination) from workers, founders and board members?There are many frameworks to prevent fraud and corruption by the OECD, World Bank, ICC and more. Taking into account its structure and size, a company should have internal auditing controls and compliance programs to assist in preventing and detecting acts of corruption.Do your company and board have any mechanisms to actively hear and incorporate feedback from internal and external stakeholders (employees, contractors, customers, shareholders, suppliers, investors, impacted communities, etc.) for both company building and product development?Integrated external engagement (IEE) is increasingly a priority, with one study revealing that CEOs spend at least one-quarter of their time managing external engagement. External engagement needs to be part of everyday business decision-making, beyond corporate social responsibility (CSR) efforts. For example, the Porter and Kramer “shared value” framework or Kramer’s “collective impact.”Are there voting members of the board who are stakeholders beyond investors or founders?Given the significant influence that a company’s key stakeholders (community members, employees, unions, etc.) have on its future prospects, the board’s knowledge and understanding of the interests of thosestakeholders should be among the factors that are considered when assessing the overall composition and balance of the board and whether there is a need to recruit new directors who represent those interests.How does your company plan to incorporate its values and long-term vision into the board?Race, gender and cognitive (behavior, opinions, experiences) diversity on boards lead to company improvement when there is a good culture in the boardroom. It is crucial to have strategic alignment on long-term vision and decision-making and its particular relation to performance and compensation.  Encourages a startup to think about real growth metrics, threats to a business and value creation for the general public and stakeholders beyond customers and investors, in a 10+ year timeframe.Does the company displace any existing public sector functions?The public sector is required to act in the public’s interest. If public sector services or products are privatized, it’s important to ensure that essential services remain affordable and available to large segments of the population.If not already so, what will it take (growth models, time horizon, policy, etc.) for your company to become profitable?Growth rates depend on a variety of factors: talent, capital requirements and the size, maturity and competition in the market. The market can punish premature or non-existent growth or over-inflated valuations and can cause quick collapses. Hard problems require patient capital and solutions, allowing for course corrections without total failure.For employees who have left your company, how many purchased the vested options that they have not yet exercised?Options reduce turnover during a vesting schedule, which reduces recruiting costs. Turnover is natural, with the Bureau of Statistics reporting that the average turnover rate in the U.S. is about 12% to 15% annually. A worker first-hand experiences the potential of the long-term success of a company. If former workers believe in a company’s long-term success, despite their departure, they are more likely to exercise their vested options.Was the science or the technology at your company backed by university research, government grants or any other consortiums?Cooperative efforts between academia, public and private sectors is essential for nascent markets and early business models. Researchers suggest and history illustrates that establishing cooperative research and development across the private sector, while ensuring that knowledge gained is leveraged by the broader scientific community, fosters long-term growth and scale.If not already doing so, will your company ever give things away, or use a freemium business model in exchange for data?Because freemium is a form of marketing and does not guarantee revenue, companies often have to sell the data that they are collecting to make up for lost revenue. The commodification of data and therefore privacy leads to concerns that might be a business model risk for such businesses and their long-term value creation: are they creating products for paying customers or free customers? Stakeholder analysis is the second section of our VCPPI tool. A stakeholder analysis is a process of systematically gathering and analyzing qualitative information to determine whose interests should be taken into account when developing and/or implementing technology. This is different from customer discovery or external engagement in that it analyzes who is impacted by the technology being created or deployed, not just purchasing or using. For this analysis, we recommend that early-stage companies consider current stakeholders, as well as ones they will potentially have in the immediate—from now to 5 years—and long-term—5 to 10+ years. Its purpose is to ensure that a startup has considered multiple perspectives, regardless of positions of decision-making or buying power. This analysis will help identify the communities or organizations that one should be considering or engaging with and to understand their position or influence on technology development, growth, reputation, regulation and overall harm.Some of this analysis can be collected through 3rd parties and research. Other times, the analysis requires engaging directly with communities in the form of community meetings, interviews, surveys, focus groups, etc.Any party or organization that interacts, buys, consumes or is impacted by the technology or company in question. The net impact of the technology or company can be either positive or negative, as well as either direct or indirect, to them. These stakeholders’ interactions with your company can be either intentional or accidental or unintentional. Stakeholders can and will evolve, and they have varying degrees of power and resources. They can be a company’s champion or opponent and, for that reason, it is always important to engage with them when appropriate.On the VCPPI tool, we provided 8 initial stakeholder groups to consider. These suggested stakeholder groups are just the beginning! VCs and startups should consider other stakeholder groups, like environmental coalitions, and specific people or organizations within these groups. Stakeholders can persuade or influence a company. Their power may be derived from the nature of the stakeholder’s position, their connections or an abundance of resources. A stakeholder can have a lot of power over your technology, but not necessarily a lot of resources (e.g., low-income communities that protest the purchasing of a specific consumer product). Startups should rank stakeholders based on their perceived level of power to influence. Those with the least amount of power should be prioritized because they are typically the most vulnerable in society and can have the most to lose with disruption and technology. Power ranking is useful for assisting in decision-making situations in which various stakeholders have competing interests, resources are limited and stakeholder needs must be appropriately balanced. When you do not have experience with in-the-field engagement, how do you properly engage with stakeholders or communities? Appropriate community engagement requires planning, practice and a deep understanding of the community that you are hoping to engage with. As a first step, research other organizations—charitable groups, civic engagement groups, homeowner associations, organizing groups or anchor institutions such as faith-based organizations, hospitals and schools—that can act as intermediaries between your company and the community you are hoping to reach. Often these groups have meaningful relationships, have built trust and can facilitate connections or conversations if direct engagement is required. There are also organizations such as City Tech Collaborative and Public Sentiment, which helps decision-makers solve local problems using genuine community engagement fueled by local community networks and powerful digital tools. Lessons can be learned from how Sidewalk Labs failed to genuinely engage with multiple stakeholders in the immediate Toronto community during their Quayside project. Keep in mind that community engagement in these cases is not about customer acquisition or market research but about reducing harms and risks. If you are offered advice on how your startup or technology can impact a specific community, you should conduct additional research and seriously consider incorporating that feedback.If you are interested in a demo of the Stakeholder Analysis on the VC + Public Purpose Indicator, please visit our . Scenario building helps develop an artificial plan based on a quick analysis and understanding of trends and events, illustrating the various paths that a startup can take. Every decision founders make at their company is a choice under a varying degree of uncertainty. These decisions can also have a major impact on the success of the company or the well-being of the general public.In the third section of the VCPPI tool, startups are asked to respond to 3 randomly selected scenarios that are related to decisions a startup might have to make that overlap with public purpose considerations, answering the question, “What would you do?” We are looking for how startups would think on their feet in these difficult situations. We want startups to respond without overly scripted or overthought responses. These scenarios are hypothetical and there are no right or wrong answers. Responses should include a thought process and should be based on predictions about where the future is going. Helpful details in response include sharing how one would gather information to make a decision, as well as the actual method one would take to get to a final decision or response.For each scenario, the responder will have 60 seconds to reply by recording a response on video. After the startup has recorded a response, the VC reviewer will be able to watch the playback of the video and offer suggestions or take notes for things to discuss in a follow-up.If you are interested in a demo of the Scenario Builder on the VC + Public Purpose Indicator, please visit our . Many investors and CEOs want to care and do more about how startups impact the public, but are not sure . Generalist investors, impact investors and startups overwhelmingly signal interest to understand long-term public purpose.: The obvious work is to figure out what a startup or fund stands for. At this point, you have your mission or values and the mandates that your LPs have laid out, but how do our 6 themes of public purpose (Environment, Labor & Inequality, Privacy & Security, Diversity and Inclusion, Governance & Anti-Corruption, Long-Term Value Creation) plug into your decision-making process? Any organization needs to figure out what its collective vision of the future looks like and how its technology or investments harmonize with that future. Some funds and startups will have a theory of change and others will just look for the next unicorns. What are the hard no’s (e.g., DoD contracts, freemium business models, water-intensive hardware, etc.)? Do the introspective work: what do you stand for and is it backed by research, science and not just personal values, patterns or gut instincts?For investors, there are plenty of ways to plug public purpose into your day-to-day operations. We have seen investors adjust their questions in diligence, build scenarios for startup founders to respond to and assist startups as they map their stakeholders during pre-investment considerations, during a pivot or rapid growth. These three practices were the inspiration for our VCPPI tool. Some funds make public purpose or impact explicit in their legal documents for pro-rata or follow-on considerations. VCs can also help startups think through their public purpose decision-making: addressing what needs to happen now, in the next 6 months or 12+ months and how to bring those decisions in OKR or goal-setting conversations. Investors can also learn alongside their startup founders by bringing in experts to provide workshops or lectures to their portfolio on topics such as ethical tech, human-centered design, human rights violations, data security, privacy, etc. Similarly, for extending education, there are over 50 books, academics, think tank papers, podcasts and pieces of government research that are referenced throughout this document. See Appendix F. The most influence and responsibility comes from the investors who take board seats. Startups and board members have a lot to worry, but centering public purpose in those boardroom conversations only minimizes risk to the company and the public.We encourage startups and investors to use impact, ESG or public purpose tools that work for their process—whatever that might be. There is not one market-defined standard or process, and our VCPPI is just one tool that could be used. Doing research and figuring out which tool, framework and standards work best for your stage, a vision of the future, or theory of change is key.For additional suggestions for VCs, please see .For a non-exhaustive list of ESG and impact frameworks, please see . To better understand the startups’ perspective on public purpose, ESG and impact, our team conducted a series of interviews with early-stage founders and CEOs. Their startups spanned from consumer marketplaces to robotics companies across industries like fintech, aerospace and urban mobility. We asked each of these companies questions about:Given the influence investors can have on a startup, we derived several key areas in which VCs can positively contribute to their portfolio companies’ public purpose strategy:To get a better grounding of the startups, we started each of our interviews by asking about the company’s mission as it pertained to public purpose and how it has evolved.In the cases where startups had already pivoted or gone through a change in their mission or impact area, that change was sometimes made as a “virtue signal” to potential investors. One of the startups we interviewed said that it was reviewing its mission statement to better reflect its broader ESG strategy because the startup believed that it would resonate with the series A investors it was targeting for the near future. Another startup, whose impact and mission included the “democratization” of the solution it developed, emphasized that the reference to democratization should be read in the commercial sense of making its solution widely affordable and accessible to a broader set of clients. Its pragmatic approach to a core part of its stated mission reflected investor expectations to “maximize profits and attract clients.”VCs can help startups more meaningfully direct their impact towards benefitting the larger public or at least reducing harms. This takes a commitment to understanding a prospect or portfolio company’s current mission as it stands and to appreciate the space in which it operates. It also involves a clear, upfront message about what it is that a VC might expect and care about public purpose.A great example of a VC understanding its startup’s mission: as one of the startups we spoke with pivoted to pursue a more climate-related purpose (a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions for customers in the hospitality space), one of their angel investors approached and suggested that the startup could also prioritize the reduction of other types of pollutants, beyond GHG emissions, that align with its business model and target customer segment. VCs should take time to understand the impact area of their startups and also help them refine what market opportunities there are in that space.Several of the startups, generalist or impact, that we spoke to did not have a comprehensive list of metrics that they measured and monitored pertaining to impact or public purpose. One company shared that, in advance of any fundraising, they ask investors for what types of metrics they would be most interested in seeing, and then tailored their pitch deck to highlight their performance in those areas. Another company argued that their public purpose could not be measured, as values cannot be assigned to the improved quality of life their service offers.Similar to Point 1., if VCs could emphasize to their startups the importance of specific, ideally consistent impact or mission-related qualitative and quantitative tracking, then they could hold them (and startups could hold themselves) more accountable to the attainment of public purpose. It is also important for the various major investors, particularly on a board, to align early on how to prioritize metrics, so that a startup is consistent across their investors.As startups grow, VCs can also point their startups in the direction of third parties to help develop and track these measurements. One startup that we interviewed onboarded an external resource and began to publish impact-related metrics to their board. The board was enthusiastic about this advanced reporting and, in other cases, could be the driving force behind it.Particularly at the earlier stages, a startup’s network is limited to the founders’ social and professional networks. Consequently, many early-stage boards lack meaningful diversity—in terms of gender, race, experience, education, investment status or ethnicity. One startup that we spoke with noted their glaringly homogenous older, white, male board. When asked about its curation, the founder noted that their advisors accumulated by personal relationships. They said that they are actively searching for people of color and women to join their advisory board, but fault their limited success in finding these people as a consequence of their small size.VCs can and should leverage their extensive networks to increase diversity on startups’ advisory boards. To expand the depth and breadth of their own networks, investors should be intentional in actively seeking out diverse perspectives, new organizations to engage with and different spaces to be part of, dropping their over-reliance on their existing circles. One startup noted with pride their intentionally diverse investor base—40% women, and a notable number of people of color. They acknowledged that this intentionality around (and access to) diverse investors came from one of their early VCs, who proactively made numerous introductions on behalf of the startup’s founder.Most founders became defensive or evasive when we asked them to consider external or internal low-likelihood high-impact events that could put their companies or entire industries on the verge of an existential threat and test the limits of their real commitment to public purpose. Those events oftentimes included new federal law or new regulations impacting the core of the businesses, the realization that their technologies or services could be exploited by customers or other stakeholders to cause harm or abuse and newly surfaced environmental neglect found in the supply chain, among other negative or unintended consequences.Most startups seemed off-guard when questioned about their preparedness to deal with such events. One of the interviewees evaded these questions altogether and simply referred to their company’s growth strategy. Another said that the biggest negative consequences on their radar were “fraud and larger competitors,” although our analysis indicated that the startup should be elevating human rights and data privacy considerations. Yet another emphasized how their company complied with existing laws and called for governmental action to prevent certain risks to their business.With some notable exceptions, few founders seemed to have thought deeply about how to adequately prepare for future public purpose-related events that stress-test their impact on the public. This is an additional area where VCs could help provide startups with the space to consider these longer-term consequences through intentional, structured scenario-building and conversations. Startups, particularly at the early stages, might lack the capacity to consider impact beyond the short-term; however, it is essential to do so in order to strengthen strategic planning and reduce future risk. Our VCPPI tool provides a mechanism to facilitate some of those conversations. On top of all of the things a startup needs to worry about, particularly in the early stages—product, investors, customers, talent, cash flow, growth, mental health and more—public purpose could seem daunting when time capacity is a reality. The unknown is also intimidating as startups pivot and make new changes daily. But startups and VCs should make time for the things that matter, and public purpose in venture-backed startups matters. Investors and startup founders should work together to consider, on an ongoing basis, difficult decisions and risks, as well as how they impact not only business models, growth, product-market fit, regulation and talent, but also negative consequences on the general public. Doing so early will save time in the long run.Without government or market standards for VC-backed startups, we hope VCs and startups anticipate technological and company-building harms with our research and VCPPI tool. We want VCs to take responsibility for the outcomes of their investments, not just their returns. We want to help startups realize the importance of privacy and security and how they relate to human rights and civil liberties before they infringe upon them. We want to encourage startups, regardless of their mission, to mitigate climate change as early as possible. We hope generalist investors and startups alike will prioritize labor issues and provide dignified work for the highly educated engineers and the low-wage workers who keep the “machines” running. We hope that startups and investors will get serious about recruiting diverse talent and prioritizing their well-being. We hope to guide startups and VCs as they create processes early on to prevent corruption and ethical issues. We want to help reduce economic inequality and motivate innovators to think about long-term value creation for all, not just a few. Also known as unanticipated consequences or negative externalities, are outcomes of purposeful action that create harm or risk to the public or company. This is the opposite of intended positive impact where the action results in a measurable and foreseeable harm reducer or benefit to the public. Examples of negative consequences include deep fakes, news misinformation, labor lawsuits, or depleting natural disasters.We have used social scientific evidence, analyzed business cases, and applied theories from economists and political scientists to prioritize the questions being asked. For more information on our references in Appendix F.No. We don’t think there is one framework, organization, or methodology on the market that covers all bases. This tool is to be used alongside existing forms of diligence. This tool would also work for investors who do not measure impact or ESG and want to start to consider public purpose.Despite having a business degree, TAPP Fellow, Liz Sisson, has worked most of her career in government and policy before joining the Urban Us venture team in 2017. She often approached investing like a policy process. She considered stakeholders outside of customers and investors and thought about the long-term impact the startups in the Urban Us portfolio could have on inequality, labor, privacy, and the environment. She wanted to scale that type of public purpose and educate other investors on the impact (both negative and positive) that investments could have.  Additional public purpose-related questions an investor could ask startups in diligence.Public purpose diligence could also include more questions on mental health, democracy, data and algorithm quality, laws and regulation, human rights and civil liberties, etc. A non-exhaustive list of ESG and Impact Tools, Frameworks, Startups and Agencies: VC + Public Purpose team analyzed over 35 companies with publicly available information for their potential and realized public purpose harms. This analysis helped ensure our research and VCPPI tool were aligning with startups in reality. Below is a sample of our analysis.Marketplace, App, Travel, Proptech2008YesPotential governance issues: Provisions to insulate board from takeover attempts (independent shareholders can’t call special meetings).Social issues: Guest safety violations,Hate speech, racism with booking. COVID-19 pandemic violations; Governance: regulatory battles as Airbnb expanded arguably too quickly in new markets to the detriment of business owners/ locals/residents (rapid real estate value increase and pushing people out of their communities)Logistics, Transportation, App, Food,2013YesIncreasingly tight competitive market (Doordash bought Caviar, Uber bought Postmates) leading to potentially monopolistic behavior. Exacerbating economic inequality (for delivery people + restaurant owners)Governance issues: Data breach in 2019 (result of poor cyber hygiene) and then insufficient communication (calling it an “incident” instead of a “breach”); Social issues: Drivers are contractors not employees, so do not get benefits, Squeezing restaurant profits and diminishing restaurant brand (thus potentially putting restaurants out of business)Software, Cloud, DevOps2008YesPotential security risks given open source technology; Also data governance or brand risks given owned by MicrosoftCompany culture has been a problem (firing people for political statements, harassment). Github blocking access internationally in sanctioned countries - Iran, Cuba, North Korea, etc. Allowing harmful content such as suicide manuals, terrorism content. They have ICE as a customer. Use master/slack terminology.Infrastructure, Consumer, Hardware, Communication, Advertising2014NAContinued issues of privacy, access, and security, lack of revenue and public input.Advertising as financing model, limited public input to the 12 year government contract and public unaware the hardware is owned and operated by a 3rd party, inequality with where services are provided, issues of surveillance, lack of data consent and clarity on data ownership, can share personal identifiable data (such as emails). Sensory overload with constant advertising.Fintech, Software, App2013YesContinued regulation by SEC around lack of customer care (e.g. finding best available terms when making trades; failure to inform customers of trade implications)Recent fines from SEC about failure to find best available terms for customers; Irresponsible/uneducated investing strategies on the part of consumers (sometimes leading to artificial bubbles, sometimes even leading to consumer self-harm); due to the extreme volatility on the platform, rumors have started circulating that Robinhood has at times needed to ask VCs for emergency funding to meet clearinghouse obligations (i.e. aftermath of GameStop)  Ansgar Koene, Chris Clifton, Yohko Hatada, Helena Webb, Menisha Patel, Caio Machado, Jack LaViolette, Rashida Richardson, Dillon Reisman. “A Governance Framework for Algorithmic Accountability and Transparency,” .Bivens, Josh. “The Economic Costs and Benefits of Airbnb.” Economic Policy Institute, March 2019. .Bukaty, Preston. . IT Governance Publishing, 2019.Catriona Wilkey, Rosie Donegan, Svetlana Yampolskaya, Regina Cannon. “Coordinated Entry Systems Racial Equity Analysis of Assessment Data,” October 2019. .. “Collective Impact.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .“Cybersecurity for Startups - C3 Voluntary Program,” n.d. .David Autor, David Mindell, and Elisabeth Reynolds. “The Work of the Future: Building Better Jobs in an Age of Intelligent Machines,” January 2021. .Deborah L. DeHaas, Brent Bachus, Eliza Horn. “Unleashing the Power of Inclusion | Attracting and Engaging the Evolving Workforce,” n.d. .5280. “Denver’s Gig Economy Workers Share Their Stories,” April 9, 2020. .. “Design Kit.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Edelman, Giled. “Social Media CEOs Can’t Defend Their Business Model.” , March 25, 2021. .. “ESG Investing and Analysis.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Field, Anne. “Coalition of Impact Heavy Hitters Urges Coordinated White House Effort to Redefine Capitalism.” , April 8, 2021. .. “Five Ways That ESG Creates Value,” n.d. Accessed April 12, 2021.Florian Berg, Julian F. Koelbel, Roberto Rigobon. “Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG Ratings,” May 17, 2020.500 Startups. “Getting Started with ESG: A GUIDE FOR EARLY-STAGE STARTUPS,” n.d. .Husack, Corey. “How U.S. Companies Harm Workers by Making Them Independent Contractors.” Washington Center for Equitable Growth, July 31, 2019. .ICSA. “The Stakeholder Voice in Board Decision Making,” 2017. .IIPP. . Lina Moe, James A. Parrott, and Jason Rochford. “The Magnitude of Low-Paid Gig and Independent Contract Work in New York State,” February 2020. .. “Living Wage Calculator.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Liz Lloyd, Jorim Schraven. “Responsible Venture Capital Integrating Environmental and Social Approaches in Early-Stage Investing,” January 2020. :uuid:2e192400-3cab-459f-b7e8-5a35bc9b8389/cdc+fmo+responsible+venture+capital+2020+-+digital.pdf.Macdonald, Katie. “The Security Benefits of Audit Logging.”  (blog), June 2016. :~:text=Detect%20Security%20Breaches,preventing%20and%20tracking%20down%20fraud.Mackeyn, John, and Rajendra Sisodia. . Harvard Business School Press, 2012.Macnish, Kevin. . Edited by Macnish Kevin. London, England: Routledge, 2017.Mayers, James. “Stakeholder Power Analysis.” IIED, March 2005. .Mazzucato, Mariana. . New York, NY: HarperAudio, 2021.. “Measure What Matters Most.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .. “Measuring Stakeholder Capitalism: Towards Common Metrics and Consistent Reporting of Sustainable Value Creation.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .“Mental Health in the Workplace Mental Health Disorders and Stress Affect Working-Age Americans.” CDC, July 2018. .Michel Schreiner, Thomas Hess. “Why Are Consumers Willing to Pay for Privacy? An Application of the Privacy-Freemium Model to Media Companies,” May 2015. .Michela Coppola, Thomas Krick, Dr. Julian Blohmke. “Feeling the Heat?” Deloitte. Accessed April 12, 2021. .Michelle Greene, Jeff Bashaw. “Building for Generations: Foundations of the LTSE Listing Principles.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Mishel, Lawrence. “Uber and the Labor Market,” May 15, 2018. .Napoletano, E. “Environmental, Social and Governance: What Is ESG Investing?” , January 21, 2021. .Nathalie Gazzaneo, Campbell Howe. “Venture Capital and Public Purpose: Analyzing ESG Frameworks and Trends.”Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs February 2021..“Necessary & Proportionate.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Neumann, Jerry. “Productive Uncertainty.” Reaction Wheel (blog), November 2020. .Newman, Nathan. “How Big Data Enables Economic Harm to Consumers, Especially to Low-Income and Other Vulnerable Sectors of the Population,” August 2014. Nuttall, Witold Henisz Dhruv Malhotra. “A New Measure to Assess Companies’ External Engagement.”  (blog), January 2019. .OECD. “Anti-Corruption Ethics and Compliance Handbook for Business,” 2013. .Office of Special Counsel for Immigration Related Unfair Employment Practices. “Frequently Asked Questions About Permissible Job Postings,” August 2015. .. “Policies to Unlock Catalytic Capital.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Porter, Michael E., George Serafeim, and Mark Kramer. “Where ESG Fails.” Institutional Investor, October 16, 2019. .“Public Sentiment.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez. “Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” June 2014.Renieris, Elizabeth M. “The Future of Data Governance.” Berkman Klein Center Collection, April 13, 2020. .Robert Epstein, Ronald E. Robertson. “The Search Engine Manipulation Effect (SEME) and Its Possible Impact on the Outcomes of Elections,” n.d. .Rosen, Michael. “Five Common Employment Law Hazards for Start-Ups,” n.d. .Schmeer, Kammi. “Stakeholder Analysis Guidelines,” 2000.. “Simple Theory of Change Checklist.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .“Social-Impact Efforts That Create Real Value.” , September 1, 2020. .Steinmueller, W. Edward. “Chapter 28 - Economics of Technology Policy.” edited by Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, 2:1181–1218, 2010.Stiglitz, Joseph. “Inequality and Economic Growth.” The Political Quarterly Publishing Co, 2016. .Taylor, Jacob Mason. “Enabling U.S. Technological Leadership for the 2050 Net-Zero Market,” February 2021. .. “Technology and Democracy.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .. “Test for Accessibility.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .“The Pivotal Factors for Effective External Engagement.” , May 2020. .“Toronto Residents Try to Block SideWalk Labs.” , February 25, 2019. .US SIF Foundation. “US SIF Foundation Releases 2018 Biennial Report On US Sustainable, Responsible And Impact Investing Trends.”  (blog), October 31, 2018. .Van Ness, Matthew D. Hill G. Wayne Kelly G. Brandon Lockhart Robert A. “Determinants and Effects of Corporate Lobbying.” Financial Management, September 2013. .. “What Is ESG.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .. “What Is Shared Value - Driving Corporate Purpose,” November 21, 2019. .. “What You Need to Know about Impact Investing.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .Tulane University. “Why Accessible Technology Is Important,” n.d. .Willuhn, Marian. “How Long Will the Lithium Supply Last?” , September 15, 2020. .Witold Henisz, Tim Koller, and Robin Nuttall. “Five Ways That ESG Creates Value.” McKinsey Quarterly, November 2019.Yoon, Eddie. “How to Market a Product When Your Buyer Isn’t Your User.” , March 2020. .Zhuang, Jie, Frank Loffler, Gary Sayler, Guirui Yu, and Guibin Jiang. “Solving Shared Problems at the Food, Energy, and Water Nexus.”  102 (2021). .Zuboff, Shoshana. . PublicAffairs, 2020.. Accessed April 12, 2021. .. Accessed April 12, 2021. . Gsi-Alliance.Org .. “What Is ESG.” Accessed February, 2021. . Napoletano, E. “Environmental, Social and Governance: What Is ESG Investing?” Forbes Magazine, January 21, 2021. .. “What You Need to Know about Impact Investing.” Accessed March, 2021. . Edelman, Gilad. “Social Media CEOs Can’t Defend Their Business Model.” Wired, March 25, 2021. . Khosrowshahi, Dara. Interview by Kara Swisher, January 2021. . Stiglitz, Joseph. “INEQUALITY AND ECONOMIC GROWTH.” The Political Quarterly Publishing Co, 2016. . Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. PublicAffairs, 2020. Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. “How to Do Well and Do Good.” . Accessed April 12, 2021. . “Five Ways That ESG Creates Value.” . Accessed April, 2021. . Jeff Cohen, Caia. “For GPs, It’s Time for a New Perspective on ESG.” , February 9, 2021. . Mazzucato, Mariana. Mission Economy: A Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism. New York, NY: HarperAudio, 2021. Neumann, Jerry. “Productive Uncertainty.” Reaction Wheel (blog), November 2020. . Florian Berg, Julian F. Koelbel, Roberto Rigobon. “Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG Ratings,” May 17, 2020.. “Inclusive Economic Growth — U.S. Impact Investing Alliance.” ..... Lampert, Adam. “Over-Exploitation of Natural Resources Is Followed by Inevitable Declines in Economic Growth and Discount Rate,” March 29, 2019. . Willuhn, Marian. “How Long Will the Lithium Supply Last?” , September 15, 2020. . Basant, Rakesh. “Exploring Linkages between Industrial Innovation and Public Policy: Challenges and Opportunities.” Vikalpa 43, no. 2 (June 2018): 61–76. . Steinmueller, W. Edward. “Chapter 28 - Economics of Technology Policy.” edited by Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, 2:1181–1218, 2010. Michela Coppola, Thomas Krick, Dr. Julian Blohmke. “Feeling the Heat?” Deloitte. Accessed April 12, 2021. . Zhuang, Jie, Frank Loffler, Gary Sayler, Guirui Yu, and Guibin Jiang. “Solving Shared Problems at the Food, Energy, and Water Nexus.” Eos 102 (2021). . George Serafeim, Ioannis Ioannou. “Yes Sustainability Can Be A Strategy.” Harvard Business Review, February 11, 2019. . Husack, Corey. “How U.S. Companies Harm Workers by Making Them Independent Contractors.” Washington Center for Equitable Growth, July 31, 2019. . Lina Moe, James A. Parrott, and Jason Rochford. “The Magnitude of Low-Paid Gig and Independent Contract Work in New York State,” February 2020. .. “Living Wage Calculator.” Accessed March, 2021. . Mishel, Lawrence. “Uber and the Labor Market,” May 15, 2018. . David Autor, David Mindell, and Elisabeth Reynolds. “The Work of the Future: Building Better Jobs in an Age of Intelligent Machines,” January 2021. . Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez. “Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” June 2014. Jessica Fjeld, Nele Achte, Hannah Hilligoss, Adam Nagy, Madhulika Srikumar. “Principled Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Consensus in Ethical and Rights-Based Approaches to Principles for AI,” February 2020. . Macnish, Kevin. The Ethics of Surveillance: An Introduction. Edited by Macnish Kevin. London, England: Routledge, 2017. “Necessary & Proportionate.” Accessed April 12, 2021. . Renieris, Elizabeth M. “The Future of Data Governance.” Berkman Klein Center Collection, April 13, 2020. . Robert Epstein, Ronald E. Robertson. “The Search Engine Manipulation Effect (SEME) and Its Possible Impact on the Outcomes of Elections,” . Catriona Wilkey, Rosie Donegan, Svetlana Yampolskaya, Regina Cannon. “Coordinated Entry Systems Racial Equity Analysis of Assessment Data,” October 2019. . Ansgar Koene, Chris Clifton, Yohko Hatada, Helena Webb, Menisha Patel, Caio Machado, Jack LaViolette, Rashida Richardson, Dillon Reisman. “A Governance Framework for Algorithmic Accountability and Transparency,” . Jake Taylor, Alan Ho. “Identifying and Reducing Harms: A Look at Artificial Intelligence.” Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. . Newman, Nathan. “How Big Data Enables Economic Harm to Consumers, Especially to Low-Income and Other Vulnerable Sectors of the Population,” August 2014. . Macdonald, Katie. “The Security Benefits of Audit Logging.” DigiCert (blog), June 2016. :~:text=Detect%20Security%20Breaches,preventing%20and%20tracking%20down%20fraud. Tulane University. “Why Accessible Technology Is Important,” .. “Test for Accessibility.” Accessed April 12, 2021. . Yoon, Eddie. “How to Market a Product When Your Buyer Isn’t Your User.” Harvard Business, March 2020. . Deborah L. DeHaas, Brent Bachus, Eliza Horn. “Unleashing the Power of Inclusion | Attracting and Engaging the Evolving Workforce,” n.d. . Office of Special Counsel for Immigration Related Unfair Employment Practices. “Frequently Asked Questions About Permissible Job Postings,” August 2015. . CDC. “Mental Health in the Workplace Mental Health Disorders and Stress Affect Working-Age Americans,” July 2018. . Van Ness, Matthew D. Hill G. Wayne Kelly G. Brandon Lockhart Robert A. “Determinants and Effects of Corporate Lobbying.” Financial Management, September 2013. . John Craig, David Madland. “How Campaign Contributions and Lobbying Can Lead to Inefficient Economic Policy.” Center for American Progress, May 2014. . OECD. “Anti-Corruption Ethics and Compliance Handbook for Business,” 2013. . “The Pivotal Factors for Effective External Engagement.” McKinsey and Company, May 2020. . Michael Porter and Mark Kramer, “Creating shared value,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 2011, Volume 89, Number 1–2, pp. 62–77.. “Collective Impact.” . ICSA. “The Stakeholder Voice in Board Decision Making,” 2017.  Landaw, Jared L. “How Diverse Is Your Board, Really?” Harvard Business Review, June 2020. . Joelle Gamble, Aman Banerji. “The Threat of Privatization for the Emerging Generation,” March 2017. . Ivashina, Victoria, and Josh Lerner. Patient Capital: The Challenges and Promises of Long-Term Investing. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019.,  and , “The effect of stock option grants on voluntary employee turnover”, , Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 5-14. . Taylor, Jacob Mason. “Enabling U.S. Technological Leadership for the 2050 Net-Zero Market,” February 2021. . Michel Schreiner, Thomas Hess. “Why Are Consumers Willing to Pay for Privacy? An Application of the Privacy-Freemium Model to Media Companies,” May 2015. . Nuttall, Witold Henisz Dhruv Malhotra. “A New Measure to Assess Companies’ External Engagement.” LSE (blog), January 2019. . Schmeer, Kammi. “Stakeholder Analysis Guidelines,” 2000. Witold Henisz, Tim Koller, and Robin Nuttall. “Five Ways That ESG Creates Value.” McKinsey Quarterly, November 2019. Mayers, James. “Stakeholder Power Analysis.” IIED, March 2005. .. “Public Sentiment.” Accessed April 12, 2021. . “Toronto Residents Try to Block SideWalk Labs.” Bloomberg News, February 25, 2019. .. “Simple Theory of Change Checklist.” Accessed April 12, 2021. . 5280.Com. “Denver’s Gig Economy Workers Share Their Stories,” April 9, 2020. .. “What You Need to Know about Impact Investing.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .. “ESG Investing and Analysis.” Accessed April 12, 2021. .. “What Is Shared Value - Driving Corporate Purpose,” November 21, 2019. .. “Measure What Matters Most.” Accessed April 12, 2021. . International Organization for Standardization. “ISO 26000 Guidance on Social Responsibility,” 2018. . Mackey, John, and Rajendra Sisodia. Conscious Capitalism: Liberating the Heroic Spirit of Business. Harvard Business School Press, 2012.. “Public Interest Technology.” .. “Guide to Responsible Tech: How to Get Involved & Build A Better Tech Future.” .