
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Protocol: using casework material for validation purposes
  

  
  

  
    
  A protocol on the use of casework material for validation purposes.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Forensic Science Regulator

      
      Published
      31 March 2016
      Last updated
      
        22 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Protocol: use of casework material validation
    
        PDF, 309KB, 48 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The thorough validation of forensic science methods normally requires the use of material from real cases. The use of such material gives rise to a number of issues and potential risks.

The Forensic Science Regulator has agreed a protocol with the Director of Public Prosecution and the National Police Chiefs’ Council to:


  simplify the process for approval of the use of casework material
  establish processes to address the issues and control the risks which result from such use




        
      

      
    Published 31 March 2016
    Last updated 22 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 September 2020
              Updated guidance.
            
            
              31 March 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Forensic Science Regulator: technical guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    