
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Get help with benefits and pensions if you have accessibility needs
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Cymraeg
        
    
  

  

  
      
  Get help if you have difficulties claiming benefits and pensions because of a disability or health condition.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Work and Pensions

      
      Published
      23 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        19 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Difficulty using the phone

        
        
          Difficulty using a computer

        
        
          Difficulty reading letters or filling in forms

        
        
          Difficulty attending face-to-face meetings

        
        
          Difficulty managing your own affairs

        
        
          How to complain

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) can make adjustments for you if your disability or health condition makes it difficult to:


  
    use the phone
  
  
    use the internet
  
  
    read letters
  
  
    fill in forms
  
  
    attend face-to-face meetings
  
  
    understand complicated information to manage your own affairs
  


Difficulty using the phone

If you have difficulty using the phone, you can use one of the following services instead.

Relay UK

Relay UK is a national service provided by BT that helps people with hearing and speech difficulties communicate with people over the phone. This can be used to contact all of our benefit and pension services.

Textphone

Textphone is available for all benefits and pensions services. The textphone number is given with the other contact details in benefits and pensions guides.

Video Relay Service

Video Relay Service allows British Sign Language (BSL) users to communicate with DWP through a BSL interpreter. The service is available for all DWP benefits and services. Check benefit and service contact details to find out where it is available and how to use it.

Other alternatives to the telephone

If you cannot use these, you can ask for:


  
    communication by email – make sure you tell us this is because of your disability or health condition
  
  
    support from a family member, a friend or someone else such as a welfare rights adviser – make sure you give them your permission to help you
  
  
    a home visit
  


Difficulty using a computer

If you have difficulty using our online services, contact the service by phone or letter. Tell them you cannot use the digital service because of your disability. You will be helped to access the service in a different way.

Difficulty reading letters or filling in forms

If you have difficulty reading letters or filling in forms, let us know when you contact us. You can ask for information in other ways, for example:


  
    larger typesize
  
  
    braille – make clear if you need type 1 or type 2
  
  
    audio – you can get letters or leaflets on CD or as an MP3 file
  
  
    email – if you use assistive technology, you can get letters and forms emailed to you in a suitable format
  
  
    phone – ask for a phone call to explain things in more detail
  
  
    paper colour – if you find it difficult to read letters because of the colour you can ask for them in a different colour
  
  
    a home visit
  


Difficulty attending face-to-face meetings

You may need to visit an office as part of your benefit or pension claim. If this may be difficult because of your disability or health condition, you can ask for ‘reasonable adjustments’, for example:


  
    an appointment at a quieter time
  
  
    a quiet area or separate room in a jobcentre to meet
  
  
    a room with a hearing loop
  
  
    a British Sign Language interpreter
  
  
    someone to meet you when you arrive at a building
  
  
    bringing someone you know to support you
  


Contact the office that asked you to attend an appointment.

If you cannot visit an office because of your disability or health condition, you can ask for a home visit.

Difficulty managing your own affairs

If you cannot manage your own affairs, or would like someone to act on your behalf you can ask for someone to become your appointee.

How to complain

If you feel that a service or information is not accessible, you can make a complaint.





      
        
    Published 23 April 2020
    Last updated 19 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 April 2021
              The Video Relay Service for British Sign Language (BSL) users is now available for all DWP benefits and services.
            
            
              23 April 2020
              Added translation
            
            
              23 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        The Personal Independence Payment (PIP) toolkit
        Carer's Allowance claim form
        Personal Independence Payment (PIP) handbook
        Carer's Credit application form
        Easy read: Personal Independence Payment (PIP)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Benefits entitlement
        Digital inclusion and accessibility in society

  


  

  


    
  


    