
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Key stage 2 tests: how to become a marker
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance about how to become a marker for the key stage 2 (KS2) English, mathematics and science national curriculum tests (commonly referred to as SATs).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Standards and Testing Agency

      
      Published
      3 April 2014
      Last updated
      
        29 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          English and mathematics tests

        
        
          Apply to be a marker

        
        
          Marker training

        
        
          Marking the tests

        
        
          Science sampling tests

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
English and mathematics tests

Criteria for becoming a marker for English or mathematics

Markers for the 2022 national curriculum tests are recruited by Capita, the Standards and Testing Agency’s external supplier. Capita manages the relationship with markers. Capita is working with the Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA), which is leading on delivering KS2 marking.

There are 3 types of markers—regular, specialist and braille.

Regular markers must either be:


  an undergraduate, undertaking the final year of a recognised course in primary school teaching
  a graduate, undertaking a recognised postgraduate course in primary school teaching or a postgraduate teacher training programme in secondary school teaching, specialising in either mathematics or English
  a primary school teacher
  a secondary school teacher, specialising in either mathematics or English


Regular markers are required to use professional judgement and subject specific knowledge to apply the mark scheme.

Specialist markers must have either:


  qualified teacher status with a minimum of one full academic year’s teaching (preferably at primary school)
  marked national curriculum tests in the last 5 years


Specialist markers are required to use professional judgement and subject specific knowledge to interpret pupil responses and the mark scheme.

Braille markers must meet the specialist marker criteria above and must have a relevant qualification in Unified English Braille (UEB).

All markers will need to be able to work accurately at speed and demonstrate a positive approach to pupils’ work.

Apply to be a marker

Previous KS2 markers are now being invited to apply for roles for the 2022 test cycle.

New applicants can register their interest in applying for a regular, specialist or braille marker role.

If you are interested in applying for a marker role, please visit www.capita-sta.co.uk, where you will be able to access role profiles, read the employment criteria and register your interest to mark. You can also see our Privacy Policy.

Marker training

Approved applicants will receive full training on the marking process and how to apply the mark scheme accurately. This will include online e-learning, virtual training, and ongoing support from a marking supervisor.

The virtual mark scheme training meeting will take place in May, shortly after pupils take the tests. This meeting will ensure approved applicants understand the marking procedures. It will also introduce them to the support network available throughout the process.

After the virtual training meeting, approved applicants will demonstrate their ability to mark accurately and consistently by marking a set of practice scripts. They will also mark qualification scripts to demonstrate that they can accurately apply the mark scheme before being approved to mark pupil responses.

Marking the tests

If successful at marking qualification scripts, approved applicants will start marking test scripts in May through to June. They will usually complete their marking within 3 weeks. Marking accuracy will be assessed throughout the marking period to ensure that all markers are marking to the agreed standard.

Science sampling tests

There will be no science sampling tests in the academic year 2021/22. We will confirm arrangements for 2022/23 in due course.




      
        
    Published 3 April 2014
    Last updated 29 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 September 2021
              Updates to how to become a marker.
            
            
              12 October 2020
              Updated for the 2021 marker recruitment activity.
            
            
              20 January 2020
              Science sampling test section amended to reflect email to coders (markers) to apply to code the 2020 science sampling tests.
            
            
              17 October 2019
              Updated for the 2019/2020 test cycle.
            
            
              30 October 2018
              Updated for the 2018 to 2019 test cycle.
            
            
              21 March 2018
              Changed to reflect the completion of marker recruitment for the 2018 tests.
            
            
              27 February 2018
              Changed to reflect the completion or marker recruitment for the 2018 science sampling tests.
            
            
              14 November 2017
              Updated for the 2017 to 2018 test cycle.
            
            
              27 June 2017
              Dates amended to reflect current marker recruitment opportunities.
            
            
              12 June 2014
              The reference to assessing the accuracy of marking (penultimate paragraph) has been amended from '...two more times during the marking period...' to '...throughout the marking period...'.
            
            
              3 April 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        National curriculum assessments: key stage 2 tests
        Teacher reference number (TRN)
        Additional payments for teaching: eligibility and payment details
        Privacy Notice: STA markers and coders
        Teacher self service portal

  




      

    Collection

  


        National curriculum assessments: key stage 2 tests

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Tests and assessments (key stage 2)

  


  

  


    
  


    