
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    The gender pay gap information employers must report
  

  
  
  
      
  Information for employers about the gender pay gap figures you must report, how and when to report them, and including a supporting narrative and action plan.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Equalities Office

      
      Published
      14 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        1 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          The gender pay gap figures you must report

        
        
          The snapshot date

        
        
          Reporting deadlines

        
        
          How to report and publish your gender pay gap information

        
        
          Failing to report and publish your gender pay gap information

        
        
          The written statement

        
        
          Adding a supporting narrative

        
        
          Adding an employer action plan

        
        
          Next steps: The data you must gather

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

Gender pay gap calculations are based on employer payroll data drawn from a specific date each year. This specific date is called the ‘snapshot date’. From 2017, if you are an employer who has a headcount of 250 or more on their ‘snapshot date’ you must comply with regulations on gender pay gap reporting. This requires employers to annually report and publish specific figures about their gender pay gap.

Employers that are required to report and publish their gender pay gap information must both:


  
    report and publish their gender pay gap information within a year following their ‘snapshot date’. 
This applies for each year that employers have a headcount of 250 or more on their snapshot date
  
  
    report their gender pay gap information to the government online, using the Gender pay gap service
  
  
    publish their gender pay gap information (and written statement if applicable) in a prominent place on their employer’s public-facing website
  


You may also publish a supporting narrative and an action plan to help explain your gender pay gap and the actions you plan to take. This is discretionary.

Employers can report and publish their gender pay gap information at any time before the deadline.

If you have a headcount of fewer than 250 on your snapshot date, you are not required to comply with the regulations but should give serious consideration to the business benefits of doing so. Find out who counts as an employee.

The Equality and Human Rights Commission can enforce any failure to comply with the regulations.


You don’t need to wait for a letter from the Government Equalities Office before publishing and reporting your gender pay gap information.


The gender pay gap figures you must report

You must calculate, report and publish these gender pay gap figures:


  percentage of men and women in each hourly pay quarter
  mean (average) gender pay gap using hourly pay
  median gender pay gap using hourly pay
  percentage of men and women receiving bonus pay
  mean (average) gender pay gap using bonus pay
  median gender pay gap using bonus pay


Find out what data you will need to gather and how to make your gender pay gap calculations.

If you are required to follow the regulations for private, voluntary and all other public authority employers, you must also submit and publish a written statement along with reporting your gender pay gap calculations.

The snapshot date

Your gender pay gap calculations will be based on payroll data drawn from a specific date each year. This specific date is called the ‘snapshot date’.

Your snapshot date and reporting deadline is determined by which regulations your employer comes under.

The snapshot date each year is:


  31 March for most public authority employers



These employers must report and publish their gender pay gap information by 30 March of the following year


  5 April for private, voluntary and all other public authority employers



These employers must report and publish their gender pay gap information and written statement by 4 April of the following year.

You will need to use the snapshot date to:


  determine who counts as an employee for the purposes of gender pay gap reporting
  determine your employees’ hourly pay (your gender pay gap calculations are based on hourly pay)
  determine the date which you must report and publish your gender pay gap information by (within 1 year after your snapshot date)


Reporting deadlines

You must report and publish your gender pay gap information at any time up to the reporting deadline, which is a year from your snapshot date.

For each year from 2017 that you have a headcount of 250 or more on your snapshot date, you must report and publish your gender pay gap by these deadlines:


  
    30 March for most public authority employers
  
  
    4 April for private, voluntary and all other public authority employers
  


Public authority employers are not required to submit a written statement.

The reporting year

The gender pay gap information you report represents a submission for the year ending on your snapshot date. You must report and publish your gender pay gap information within one calendar year of your ‘snapshot date’.


Example: The reporting year
Acme Ltd has a headcount of 250 employees on 5 April 2020. Because Acme Ltd is covered by the regulations for private, voluntary and all other public authority employers their snapshot date is 5 April. Therefore they must report and publish their gender pay gap information using calculations based on this date.

By 4 April 2021 Acme Ltd must report and publish this gender pay gap information on the Gender pay gap service. This will display as a submission for the 2020/21 reporting year. They must also submit and publish a written statement confirming that the published information is accurate, and this must be signed by an ‘appropriate person’.


How to report and publish your gender pay gap information

You must use the government’s Gender pay gap service to:


  report your gender pay gap figures
  submit your written statement if your employer must follow the regulations for private, voluntary and all other public authority employer regulations



You must also publish your gender pay gap report (and written statement if applicable) in a prominent place on your employer’s public facing website.

You may also publish a supporting narrative and an action plan to help explain your gender pay gap. This is discretionary.

Benefits of early reporting and publishing your gender pay gap information
You should add gender pay gap reporting into a sensible point of your reporting cycle and aim to report and publish your gender pay gap information as soon after the snapshot date as is reasonable to do.

Benefits of reporting and publishing soon after your snapshot date include:


  being seen as a leader in your sector which could have positive impacts on recruitment, retention and contract awards
  the data you require to calculate your gender pay gap may be more easily accessed
  better able to manage key employees that are needed to prepare your submission
  any unexpected issues or complications can be tackled earlier on
  early analysis of your gender pay gap can mean early action to tackle any pay gaps identified


Failing to report and publish your gender pay gap information

It is a legal requirement for all employers who are required to report and publish their gender pay gap information to accurately report this information. Failing to do this within one year of your snapshot date is unlawful.

It is your responsibility to determine if your employer must report gender pay gap information.

Read more about who is required to report

The Equality and Human Rights Commission has the power to enforce any failure to comply with the regulations


Six month suspension to the enforcement of gender pay gap regulations
Due to the impact of Coronavirus (COVID‑19), the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) have announced that enforcement of gender pay gap reporting for the 20/21 reporting year (which uses a snapshot date of 31 March 2020 and 5 April 2020) will not begin until 5 October 2021. The EHRC is encouraging employers to report ahead of the usual deadlines (30 March 2021 and 4 April 2021) wherever possible, but no enforcement action will be taken providing they report by 5 October 2021.


Penalties for failing to report

Employers that fail to report on time, or report inaccurate data, will be in breach of the regulations and risk facing enforcement action from the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), leading to court orders and fines.

Further details of the EHRC enforcement strategy

Reputational risk for failing to report

You may also run a reputational risk to your employer if you fail to report and publish your gender pay gap information. In many cases the suspicions behind why an employer failed to publish their gender pay gap could have a negative impact and be far worse than what would have been shown by the report.

The Gender pay gap service applies publicly visible ‘late badges’ to employers registered within the service and have failed to report and publish their gender pay gap information for any year they are required to do so.

The written statement

If you must follow the regulations for private, voluntary and all other public authority employers you must submit and publish a written statement along with reporting your gender pay gap calculations.

Public authority employers are not required to submit a written statement, unless they are not listed in Schedule 19 to the Equality Act 2010.

This statement must confirm that the published information is accurate, and this must be signed by an ‘appropriate person’.

The appropriate person will depend on the type of employer involved:


  for any corporate body other than a limited liability partnership, this will be a director (or equivalent)
  for a limited liability partnership, this will be a designated member
  for a limited partnership, this will be a general partner
  for any other kind of partnership, this will be a partner
  for an unincorporated body of persons other than a partnership, this will be a member of the governing body or a senior officer
  for any other type of body, this will be the most senior employee


Submitting and publishing your written statement

You must report and publish your gender pay gap data and written statement within a year of your employer’s ‘snapshot date’.

Employers that are required to submit a written statement must do so by 4 April of the year following a snapshot date of 5 April.

You must publish your gender pay gap report and written statement in a prominent place on your employer’s public-facing website.

You must keep the information available online for at least 3 years from the date of publication. If you do not have a website, you should publish your figures on any intranet and/or parent company website and ensure that this information is brought to the attention of employees.

Adding a supporting narrative

Adding a supporting narrative helps anyone reading your gender pay gap report understand your employer’s view of why a gender pay gap is present and what your employer has already done to analyse and close it. Your supporting narrative can signal your commitment to closing your gender pay gap to your employees and anyone else accessing your report.

A gender pay gap doesn’t necessarily mean your employer has acted inappropriately or discriminatorily.


Using your supporting narrative to explain your gender pay gap

It is important to effectively diagnose your gender pay gap before explaining it in detail through a supporting narrative, and creating an action plan. This will ensure you draw the right conclusions from your gender pay gap data and increase your employer’s ability to address your gender pay gap.


You may like to consider creating a supporting narrative that includes:


  explanations for each of your gender pay gap figures in your report
  an explanation of the difference between unequal pay and the gender pay gap, to contextualise and clarify your results
  workforce statistics, so you can provide a wider and more clear picture of why your gender pay gap exists
  more detailed analysis of your employer’s gender pay gap
  the efforts your employer has already taken to understand and address your gender pay gap


Benefits of including a supporting narrative:


  a positive impact on your employer’s reputation
  an opportunity to explain that some of the measures you may have taken to address your gender pay gap, and their impact, may take a while to reflect in your annual gender pay gap report
  an opportunity to show commitment and progression of your goals to close your gender pay gap (if you publish a supporting narrative each year).


Adding an employer action plan

You may want to consider publishing an action plan that explains how you intend to tackle your gender pay gap. 
An action plan can either be published as part of your supporting narrative or alongside it.

An action plan should name clear, specific targets that you commit to achieving within a chosen time frame. 
These can relate to actions aimed at understanding your gender pay gap and/or closing your gender pay gap.

In contrast, the supporting narrative should focus on contextual information and explaining the actions you have already taken.

Benefits of publishing an action plan with targets and clear actions:


  you will be sending a strong signal about your commitment to gender equality in the workplace
  attracting a wider pool of potential recruits for vacancies
  developing a reputation for being a fair and progressive employer
  enhanced productivity that can come from a workforce that feels valued and engaged in a culture committed to tackling inequality


Diagnosing your gender pay gap before creating an action plan


Hiring more women in senior positions is not the only action that’s needed to close the gender pay gap.


Before seeking to tackle your gender pay gap, you should diagnose exactly what is driving it. This will allow you to develop a meaningful, strong action plan that will have a real impact on your gender pay gap.

Evidence shows that the cause can vary greatly, even between employers in the same sector.

Your employer’s gender pay gap could arise from gender differences in:


  recruitment, including starting salaries
  performance ratings and promotions, including men and women ‘getting stuck’ at different levels
  exit rates
  other factors, for example bonus payments or support of part-time work and parental leave and its impact on progression


The Government Equalities Office, in partnership with the Behavioural Insights Team (BIT), has published evidence based, best practice guidance on understanding your gender pay gap, and the actions employers can include in their plans to reduce the gender pay gap.


Example: Using a supporting narrative and action plan to aid understanding of your gender pay gap report

An employer with a moderate gender pay gap and an action plan to reduce their gap further has recently identified a number of key reasons for the gap and actions to take to help close the gap. The employer uses the supporting narrative to explain this and confirm measures are in place to reduce the gender pay gap.



Example: Using a supporting narrative and action plan to help explain that some actions can take time to impact on a gender pay gap

An employer has implemented a number of actions intended to reduce their gender pay gap, including a review of staff bonus schemes, recruitment processes and career development opportunities. They expect the changes will begin to impact over the next two to four years. The employer uses the supporting narrative to give a brief overview of the measures in place.



Example: Using a supporting narrative and action plan to show you have reduced your gender pay gap

An employer has implemented a number of successful actions to increase recruitment of women into their research organisation, which resides in the traditionally men-dominated science sector.

They only have a small proportion of women in senior positions. Recruitment is mostly entry-level or junior positions, due to the lack of women currently working in this sector.

The employer realises this is a great step forward, but it’s possible their gender pay gap has increased in the short term.

The employer uses their supporting narrative to explain this, setting out the positive impact their actions have had on gender diversity and that they expect to see a decrease in the gender pay gap over the long term.


Next steps: The data you must gather

The guidance titled The gender pay gap data you must gather provides information on:


  the 5 tasks you need to complete before making your gender pay gap calculations
  examples of how to gather the required data


More information and support

You can get advice on managing your employer’s gender pay gap from the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas).

For queries relating to technical difficulties, managing your Gender pay gap service account, or using the Gender pay gap service generally you can contact us by email at gpg.reporting@geo.gov.uk

If using the Gender pay gap service is not accessible to you, please contact us by email at gpg.reporting@geo.gov.uk for further assistance.

Please note that the Government Equalities Office cannot provide case specific guidance on how employers should calculate their gender pay gap or interpret the regulations. Where the available guidance does not appear to cover particular queries, employers may wish to obtain their own professional advice.





      
        
    Published 14 December 2020
    Last updated 1 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 November 2021
              The deadline for reporting was extended due to COVID-19. As that deadline has now passed, reference to it has been removed from the page in preparation for the next reporting period.
            
            
              23 February 2021
              Updated with information about the extension of the reporting deadline
            
            
              14 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Who needs to report their gender pay gap
        The gender pay gap data you must gather
        Making your gender pay gap calculations
        Gender pay gap reporting: changes to enforcement
        Report your gender pay gap data

  




      

    Collection

  


        Gender pay gap reporting

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business regulation

  


  

  


    
  


    