Dear Friends and Colleagues,Between the pandemic, social unrest, and an election for the ages, a Center dedicated to advancing policy relevant research and mentoring the next generation of leaders has never felt more relevant. As you’ll see in this newsletter, we haven’t let remote work slow us down. Our research and programming on issues ranging from climate change to transatlantic relations are reaching more people than ever. We are proud to have members of our community serve the new administration in Washington. And see below for expert recommendations on what the Biden team should prioritize in its first 100 days.Pre-pandemic, I walked daily around campus to connect with the remarkable people who make this place run. I miss those connections. But we have not and will not stop connecting our expertise and insights with policymakers and the public to help build a better world.As the new presidential administration prepares to take office, we asked our scholars and practitioners:   These experts—many of whom previously served in government—share their advice.Halla Logadóttir, Co-Director of the Arctic Initiative, teaches her Kennedy School class from Iceland’s Langjökull glacier. She takes the class - and us - inside the glacier, askingStep into the glacier through .In its inaugural Tech Spotlight recognition ceremony, Ash Carter and the Technology and Public Purpose Project (TAPP) celebrated three outstanding initiatives that represent the best in responsible development of technology for the public good.  This fall, the Economic Diplomacy Initiative, led by Aditi Kumar, Nicholas Burns, and Lawrence Summers, hosted discussions on the U.S.-China economic relationship, including the digital dimension of competition between the countries.The United States Foreign Service is confronting one of the most profound crises in its long and proud history.  The Future of Diplomacy Project has released a new report, with detailed recommendations for revitalizing the Foreign Service. The report is the culmination of a years work led by Ambassadors Nicholas Burns, Marc Grossman, and Marcie Ries.The Project on Europe and the Transatlantic Relationship and the German Council on Foreign Relations have produced a strategic plan with recommendations to governments in the U.S., Europe, and Canada.  provides recommendations for  renewing, revitalizing, and retooling “the most powerful democratic community in modern history.” West Virginia Secretary of State Mac Warner explains how the Defending Digital Democracy Project’s trainings and playbooks helped keep 2018 and 2020 elections secure.More than 600 participants – many from the Intelligence Community (IC) – took part in a remote conference this fall focused on building a more diverse and capable IC.Since March, Belfer Center scholars and practitioners, including John P. Holdren and Juliette Kayyem, have answered pandemic-related questions and provided detailed steps to prepare for and better respond to future pandemics.As part of a new Middle East Initiative event series, , MEI hosted Iraqi/British journalist and political analyst Mina Al-Oraibi, Editor-in-Chief of  newspaper based in Abu Dhabi. She shared her views of the U.S. and democracy. We asked Fredrik Logevall why he decided to write what some of his "aha" momentwere during research, and whether he thinks JFK would have been elected in 2020. Read his insightful responses.A common element in Erika Manouselis’s life is bridges. The Future of Diplomacy Project Coordinator connects people, ideas, and actions. Most recently, she has led efforts around Center diversity, inclusion, and belonging.Welcome to Francesca Giovannini, new Executive Director of the Project on Managing the Atom. She brings extensive experience in nuclear non-proliferation, international security, and multilateral diplomacy.  Delve into this sampling of significant events, activities, and recognitions from our programs and projects.Our Applied History Project and International Security Program this fall offered event series looking at history's impact on today’s challenges and today’s influence on the future world order. Our National Security Fellows have forged a new connection with national security executives, while Fellows with our Middle East Initiative and Cyber Project have been recognized for best papers and outstanding work in cybersecurity, respectively.79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, Director, Co-Director, Executive Director
 Editor: , Associate Director of CommunicationsDesigner: ,Publishing ManagerMultimedia: , Multimedia ProducerDigital Outreach: , Digital Communications Coordinator, Director of Global Communications & StrategyThe Communications Office would like to thank the following staff members for their assistance in producing this newsletter: Maria Barsallo Lynch, Jacob Carozza, Caitlin Chase, Carly Demetre, Jeff Fields, Grace Headinger, Brittany Janis, Susan Lynch, Julia Martin, John Park, Tara Tyrrell, and Lauren Zabierek.   