
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Skills for the Mature Workforce project call in Worcester LEP (OC38S21P1825)
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project to identify barriers faced by older people to continuing in
employment, and provide support to both individuals and businesses to address
these barriers in Worcester LEP area.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      19 April 2021
      Last updated
      
        15 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      West Midlands
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      14 June 2021
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this project call. The information provided below is for reference purposes only.


Details

The purpose of this call is to identify barriers faced by older people to continuing in
employment, and provide support to both individuals and businesses to address
these barriers and increase economic productivity of businesses employing 50+
population in Worcestershire.

The Hub approach should be closely aligned to the WLEP Growth Hub.

Applicants should consider how they will:

For employers - how to effectively share expertise across their workforces while avoiding ageism. This will be designed to help them understand generational learning styles and preferences and choose the best transfer methods for their needs.


  
    support and training for business owners/leaders to enable them to understand the needs of older workers and how they can offer flexible working and training opportunities for older workers beyond part-time hours
  
  
    support and training for line managers to enable them to correctly meet the needs of an ageing workforce
  
  
    provision of individually tailored mid-career reviews for 50+ workers to include a review of current role and skills, future prospects and direction, and imminent and future flexible working requirements including for health reasons
  
  
    many mature workers will have the experience and knowledge so by using their skills to observe, advise and instruct others to improve productivity
  
  
    cross mentoring to the younger workforce and mid-career workforce, setting up a reverse mentoring scheme – when younger employees teach the mature employees their skills such as digital technology
  


Working with individuals to deliver on identified training needs identified in
mid-career reviews, for example:


  
    provision of training and retraining for older workers to ensure relevant and
up to date skills, for example digital skills
  
  
    provision of specialist training opportunities for 50+ workers where
required
  
  
    provision of apprenticeships for older workers
  


For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Worcester LEP area.

Value

Approximately £ 2,000,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 14th June 2021

Completion date

Projects must be financially completed (i.e. have a proposed Financial Completion Date) no later than 31st December 2023; however, the Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.
The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to
E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details

If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.





      

      
        
    Published 19 April 2021
    Last updated 15 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              15 June 2021
              Skills for the Mature Workforce project call in Worcester LEP (OC38S21P1825) project call is now closed.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    