
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Submit a research report to MOD
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out how to submit your research to Athena, Dstl's central repository of MOD-sponsored scientific and technical research reports.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      1 July 2014
      Last updated
      
        28 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Report documentation page

        
        
          Defence research report specification

        
        
          Athena collection management policy

        
        
          More information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Athena will add any newly published science and technology (S&T) research reports produced in support of the Ministry of Defence (MOD) S&T programme into the Athena report collection free of charge as long as reports meet the following criteria:


  all material must have an S&T focus
  all material must be technically reviewed
  all material must include a completed report documentation page (see below)


Reports sent to Athena that don’t meet this criteria will not be added to the collection.

Report documentation page

The report documentation page is a 2-page form that must be attached to the end of each report, regardless of whether the report template used is a Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) template, MOD template, industry template or a customer-specific template.

The report documentation page is comprised of a number of fields. This allows the author to provide a range of information about the report, for example, its classification and its intellectual property conditions (such as copyright conditions and who the report can be released to). This information helps Athena to manage the report appropriately. It also enables effective search and retrieval of the document from the Athena report collection.

Guidance

Read this guidance before completing the form.


  Report documentation page: guidelines for use (PDF, 36.1KB, 2 pages)
  Report documentation page: guidelines for use (open document format) (ODT, 13.2KB)


Form


  Report documentation page (MS Word Document, 51KB)


Defence research report specification

The  Defence research report specification (ODT, 88.8KB)  outlines requirements for the presentation, format and production of scientific and technical reports prepared for MOD. Its aim is to standardise the format and content of all reports supplied under contract to MOD. It provides a template report cover page, guidance on completing the Report documentation page (MS Word Document, 51KB), explains the sections that are expected to feature in a MOD report, includes guidance on writing abstracts and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) statements for use in MOD reports.

Athena collection management policy

For more information on the types of documents accepted into the Athena report collection, please read the  Athena collection management policy (ODT, 64.3KB).

More information

If you have any questions about submitting a report to Athena, please email AthenaEnquiries@dstl.gov.uk.





      
        
    Published 1 July 2014
    Last updated 28 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 September 2021
              Updated report documentation page guidelines, defence research report specification and Athena collection management policy.
            
            
              24 November 2017
              New collection management policy added.
            
            
              28 April 2017
              New version of report documentation page added
            
            
              12 December 2016
              Defence research report specification document updated
            
            
              8 January 2016
              Updating Defence research report specification guide
            
            
              1 July 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Access defence science and technology research
        Ministry of Defence copyright and merchandising: information and documents
        MOD logos or unit badges for use on memorials and headstones: permission
        Touchstone Award for Trading Standards 2021
        FOI responses published by MOD: week commencing 25 July 2016

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Access defence science and technology research

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military recruitment, training and operations
        Funding programmes

  


  

  


    
  


    