
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Accessibility statement for 'Tell Ofsted about a serious childcare incident' service
  

  
  
  
      
  This accessibility statement is for our 'tell Ofsted about a serious childcare incident' digital service.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ofsted

      
      Published
      18 February 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How accessible this website is

        
        
          What to do if you cannot access parts of this website

        
        
          Reporting accessibility problems with this website

        
        
          Technical information about this website’s accessibility

        
        
          How we tested this website

        
        
          What we’re doing to improve accessibility

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This digital service is run by Ofsted. We want as many people as possible to be able to use this website. For example, that means you should be able to:


  zoom in up to 300% without the text spilling off the screen
  navigate most of the website using just a keyboard
  navigate most of the website using speech recognition software
  listen to most of the website using a screen reader (including the most recent versions of JAWS, NVDA and VoiceOver)


We’ve also made the website text as simple as possible to understand.

AbilityNet has advice on making your device easier to use if you have a disability.

How accessible this website is

We know some parts of this website are not fully accessible:


  you cannot modify the line height or spacing of text
  the PDF document is not fully accessible to screen reader software


Some other issues regarding text alternatives are present for a small number of links or images. These are in the process of being fixed.

The majority of the site is fully accessible, including to screen readers and those using assistive technology. This includes the use of text alternatives for links, images and buttons.

What to do if you cannot access parts of this website

If you need information on this website in a different format, like large print or Braille, you can:


  email publishing@ofsted.gov.uk

  call 0300 123 1231


Reporting accessibility problems with this website

We’re always looking to improve the accessibility of this website. If you find any problems that are not listed on this page or think we’re not meeting accessibility requirements, contact us.

Enforcement procedure

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018 (the ‘accessibility regulations’). If you’re not happy with how we respond to your complaint, contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS).

Contacting us by phone or visiting us in person

People who are D/deaf, hearing impaired or have a speech impediment can contact us using a text relay service.

You can contact us by:


  using our online form

  emailing enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk

  calling 0300 123 1231


Our helpline is open from 8am to 6pm (Monday to Friday).

Technical information about this website’s accessibility

Ofsted is committed to making its website accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

This website is partially compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.1 AA standard, due to the non-compliances listed below.

Non-accessible content

The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Non-compliance with the accessibility regulations

Most images and links have a clear text alternative. However, some do not have a text alternative, or alternative texts are not clear, so the information in them is not available to people using a screen reader. This does not meet WCAG 2.1 success criterion 1.1.1 (non-text content).

We plan to add text alternatives, at which point we will update this statement. Whenever we publish new content, we’ll make sure our use of images meets accessibility standards.

PDFs and other documents

The PDF of the submitted form does not meet accessibility standards – it may not be structured so that it is accessible to a screen reader. This does not meet WCAG 2.1 success criterion 4.1.2 (name, role value).

How we tested this website

This website was last tested on 24 September 2019. The test was carried out by the Digital Accessibility Centre.

We tested our Tell Ofsted about a serious childcare incident service.

What we’re doing to improve accessibility

We are currently building this service; it is in a development stage where we seek public feedback. As we continue to develop the service, we will improve accessibility. We will adhere to Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.1 AA standard for all new and amended content and pages as the service continues to be developed.

This statement was prepared on 18 February 2020. It was last updated on 18 February 2020.





      
        
    Published 18 February 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Ofsted's compliance and enforcement handbooks

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    