
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    MOD Welsh Language Scheme 2021
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Cymraeg
        
    
  

  


  
    
  When conducting public business in Wales, English and Welsh languages are treated equally.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      15 December 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    MOD Privacy Notice
    
        ODT, 44.2 KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ddc-modinternet@mod.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Hysbysiad Preifatrwydd MOD
    
        ODT, 45.9 KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ddc-modinternet@mod.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Welsh Language Champion for Defence biography and statement
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Pencampwr y Gymraeg ym Maes Amddiffyn bywgraffiad a datganiad
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Ministry of Defence’s Welsh Language Scheme, approved in October 2021, sets out how the Ministry of Defence will give effect to the principle that it will always treat the English and Welsh languages equally, when providing services to the Welsh speaking public in Wales.

The Welsh Language Scheme

Annual Report 2019-2020

Contact us

We welcome recommendations on how we can improve our services under the MOD Welsh Language Scheme.  If you have any suggestions, or are unhappy with the service being provided, you can contact us in the first instance as follows:

Email: MOD-WelshLanguageScheme@mod.gov.uk

Postal Address:



MOD Welsh Language Scheme 
United Kingdom Strategic Command 
Room HG4 Hackett Building 
Defence Academy of the United Kingdom
Shrivenham SN5 8LA






        
      

      
    Published 15 December 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces

  


  

  


    
  


    