The early stages of research I am conducting in the Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) project on Venture Capital and Public Purpose, with support from graduate research assistants  and , has consisted of conversing with and interviewing venture capital investors and accelerators.  We have spoken to investors across geographies (North America, the EU, and Israel), size ($30M-$3B+ AUM) and focus areas (AI, deep tech, and consumer). Some of these investors are from corporate VCs and some identify as impact investors. The purpose of these conversations has been to learn how these individuals and firms:  Our overarching hypothesis is: technology investors need a better system to analyze the public purpose impact and other long-term consequences of the technologies they are investing in, and how those analyses tie back to product market fit, growth and exitability or liquidity. Venture capital spans across what I call the “impact to traditional investing” spectrum. On one side of the spectrum, there are the investors- who primarily focus on the financial aspect of the investments they make and are largely indifferent to impact or purpose. These investors’ responsibility to and mandate from their LPs is in financial returns. On the other side of the spectrum are [social] impact investors. Socially or environmentally conscious investing has grown considerably in the past few years, with  dollars flowing into funds that use ESG criteria or focus on broader areas of impact. Oftentimes, these investors have a directive from their LPs to consider the impact on society and measure specific metrics (GHG emissions, job creation, housing provided, etc.) to assess efficacy. In the middle of this spectrum are those investors who first and foremost seek financial returns but also consider broader mission or impact. Climate tech is a perfect example of where public purpose, policy, technology, and innovation can create positive change and how people can easily identify on the aforementioned spectrum. Cleantech investing in particular has seen one of the biggest booms of the middle to impact side of the spectrum, despite the past trauma of the +$25b loss investors experienced around 2011. Stronger than ever, climate tech investing has seen  since 2013 with over . Founders in the space have proven climate and cleantech can have ,  companies with . As money continues to go to climate tech, it will be interesting to see if these investors prioritize financial returns or impact on the climate. Or will climate tech investors push beyond climate considerations and examine additional consequences of the company or technology -- on issues such as  privacy, inclusion, job creation, human rights, and inequality? From the research we have been conducting, below are a few themes and observations that show up consistently and have been informing how we are mapping out our public purpose analysis tool:  While many frameworks emphasize how companies should report their impact and through which parameters, the effects of impact often remain siloed and separate from financial reporting and metrics. Some investors look at financial metrics, then assess impact. Others look at these two areas in parallel with equal weight or see it entirely interconnected.  “Uncertainty, generally, is something to be avoided. If you can’t predict the outcomes of your actions you will have a hard time planning and managing. And if others see that your business proposition is uncertain they will shy away from including your product in their plans. But uncertainty can also shield against competition, allowing you to create excess value. If it does, it is productive uncertainty. Innovations, because they are new, usually come with uncertainties of one sort or another. Founders have to choose the subset of innovations where the uncertainty is productive to have the best chance of succeeding.” -  In our next phase of research, in addition to continuing our conversations with VCs interested in public purpose, we will be iterating on an MVP of our analysis tool and demoing it to investors and founders. We will also continue to think through thought-provoking and tough questions that will inform our research and tool:  