







Innovating for Improved Healthcare
Sociotechnical and Innovation Systems Perspectives and Lessons from the NHSPublished in: Science and Public Policy (February 2020). doi: 10.1093/scipol/scaa005 Posted on RAND.org on February 06, 2020
by Sonja Marjanovic, Marlene Altenhofer, Lucy Hocking, Joanna Chataway, Tom Ling
Related Topics: Health Care Technology, Patient Experience, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy, United Kingdom
View related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at Oxford University PressThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








Healthcare systems with limited resources face rising demand pressures. Healthcare decision-makers increasingly recognise the potential of innovation to help respond to this challenge and to support high-quality care. However, comprehensive and actionable evidence on how to realise this potential is lacking. We adopt sociotechnical systems and innovation systems theoretical perspectives to examine conditions that can support and sustain innovating healthcare systems. We use primary data focussing on England (with 670 contributions over time) and triangulate findings against globally-relevant literature. We discuss the complexity of factors influencing an innovating healthcare system's ability to support the development and uptake of innovations and share practical learning about changes in policy, culture, and behaviour that could support system improvement. Three themes are examined in detail: skills, capabilities, and leadership; motivations and accountabilities; and collaboration and coordination. We also contribute to advancing applications of sociotechnical systems thinking to major societal transformation challenges.

Access further information on this document at Oxford University PressThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


 Related Products 








Project
Innovating for improved healthcare: the current context and ways forward for quality and productivity in the NHS

Jan 27, 2020






Research conducted by

RAND Europe



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Sonja Marjanovic, Marlene Altenhofer, Lucy Hocking, Joanna Chataway, Tom LingPublisher: Oxford University Press
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 15
Document Number: EP-68073
Year: 2020
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Health Care TechnologyPatient ExperienceScience, Technology, and Innovation PolicyUnited Kingdom

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




