
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Facing the camera
  

  
  

  
    
  Good practice and guidance for the police use of overt surveillance camera systems incorporating facial recognition technology to locate persons on a watchlist.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Surveillance Camera Commissioner

      
      Published
      15 March 2019
      Last updated
      
        3 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Facing the camera
    
        PDF, 701KB, 72 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance is produced by the Surveillance Camera Commissioner (the SCC) to assist police forces in England and Wales to comply with their statutory obligations arising from Section 33 Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 (PoFA) and the Surveillance Camera Code of Practice (SC Code).

This publication has been prepared to assist in the considerations which are to be applied by police forces who are operating or intending to operate overt surveillance camera systems in public places in England and Wales together with facial recognition technology to locate persons who are on watchlist.

The guidance is to be read in conjunction with the SC Code. It does not affect changes to that Code.



        
      

      
    Published 15 March 2019
    Last updated 3 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 December 2020
              The guidance has been updated following the recommendations made in the Bridges v South Wales police court judgement.
            
            
              15 March 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Guidance on the use of domestic CCTV
        Surveillance cameras on drones
        To the point: Cambridge City Council CCTV single point of contact
        Decoding self-assessment: Aston University uses our self-assessment tool
        Salford University receive the Commissioner’s certification mark

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law

  


  

  


    
  


    