
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Flexibility Innovation Programme
  

  
  

  
    
  This programme looks to support innovative solutions to enable large-scale widespread electricity system flexibility.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      7 October 2021
      Last updated
      
        16 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Flexibility Innovation Programme: Market Engagement Questionnaire
    
        MS Word Document, 122KB
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

The Flexibility Innovation: Market Engagement Questionnaire ran from 7 October to 14 November 2021.


The recently published Smart Systems and Flexibility Plan 2021 and Energy Digitalisation Strategy identified key BEIS policy priorities to enable the transition to a smart, flexible and decarbonised energy system.

To support the transition, Flexibility Innovation Programme seeks to enable large-scale widespread electricity system flexibility through smart, flexible, secure, and accessible technologies and markets. Up to £65 million will be made available. This overarching programme will fund innovation across a range of key smart energy applications. New activities under the Flexibility Innovation Programme will be launched over the coming year.

The Flexibility Innovation Programme forms part of a substantial part of a commitment set out in the Prime Minister’s 10 point plan for a green industrial revolution, to invest at least £100 million on energy storage and flexibility innovation challenges.

The Flexibility Innovation Programme is in development phase but it is anticipated areas of focus could include integrating systems for flexibility, data and digitalisation solutions, and markets for flexibility.

The programme is part of the Net Zero Innovation Portfolio.



        
      

      
    Published 7 October 2021
    Last updated 16 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 November 2021
              The Market Engagement Questionnaire for the Flexibility Innovation Programme has closed.
            
            
              29 October 2021
              Questionnaire closing date extended to 14 November 2021, 11:59 pm.
            
            
              7 October 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Digitalising our energy system for net zero: strategy and action plan
        Transitioning to a net zero energy system: smart systems and flexibility plan 2021
        Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration competition: cross-cutting guidance
        Green Home Finance Accelerator
        Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration (LODES) competition (closed to applications)

  




      

    Collection

  


        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon technologies
        UK energy security
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    