
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Get plant breeders’ rights for your new variety
  

  
  
  
      
  How to get plant breeders' rights and what protection it gives your plant varieties.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Animal and Plant Health Agency and Natural England

      
      Published
      7 September 2012
      Last updated
      
        11 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who can apply

        
        
          Plant variety rights in the EU

        
        
          What you can get rights for

        
        
          Plant variety rights in the UK

        
        
          Get a consent for genetically modified plants

        
        
          How rights can protect your plant varieties

        
        
          Name your variety

        
        
          Apply for plant breeders’ rights

        
        
          Apply online

        
        
          Application closing dates

        
        
          Contacts

        
        
          Fees

        
        
          After you’ve applied

        
        
          Monthly Gazette

        
        
          Special edition

        
        
          If you’re refused plant breeders’ rights

        
        
          If you lose your rights documents

        
        
          End your rights

        
        
          When you can be forced to give licences

        
        
          Take someone to court

        
        
          Contact the Plant Variety Rights Office

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guide tells you how to apply for intellectual property rights over your plant varieties in the UK.

These rights are known as plant breeders’ rights (PBR). You can get them from the Plant Variety Rights Office (PVRO) for the UK.


Read the guidance if you want to:


  add a new plant variety to the national list
  plant seeds that you’ve harvested in your own holding



Who can apply

You can apply for PBR if you’ve bred or developed a plant variety, or if you’ve been chosen by the breeder as their successor.

An agent can apply to be appointed to manage the application process if they are authorised.

They’ll need to complete an authorisation of agent form.

If the applicant or agent applying isn’t based in the UK, you will need to appoint an authorised UK agent.

Upload this form using the attachment section in UPOV PRISMA when applying.

Who can’t apply

You can’t apply for rights of a plant you bred, discovered or developed for a company you’re employed by. Your employer can apply for the rights.

Plant variety rights in the EU
There is no change in protection in the 27 EU Member States.

Varieties with EU rights granted before 31 December 2020 will get a corresponding UK right from 1 January 2021, when EU rights will no longer apply in the UK.

If you’ve already applied for EU rights, but these were not granted before 1 January 2021, you must apply to the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) for protection in the UK using the UPOV PRISMA online application process.

For new varieties, you’ll need to apply separately in the UK and the EU. You must apply to the:


  
Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) for UK protection
  
Community Plant Variety Office (CPVO) for EU protection


UK businesses can still hold and apply for EU plant variety rights from 1 January 2021, although you’ll need an address or procedural representative in the EU.

What you can get rights for

You can get rights for new plant varieties, including genetically modified varieties.

To get rights, your variety must be:


  distinct – have different characteristics to other plants of the same species
  uniform – all plants in the variety must share the same characteristics
  stable – it remains unchanged after ‘repeated propagation’, for example reproduction from seeds, cuttings, bulbs or other plant parts


You can register your variety in the UK if you’ve already registered it in a different country. Your UK cover will be backdated to the start of the protection you got first.

What you can’t get rights for

You can’t get the rights for a variety if it’s been sold or used for commercial use:


  in the UK more than 1 year before you apply
  outside of the UK more than 4 years before you apply (6 years for trees or vines)


The exception is for varieties with an undecided EU application on 31 December 2020 and a subsequent UK PBR application made within 6 months. In this case, novelty is retained if the first commercialisation in the EU or UK was no more than 1 year before the date of application for EU rights (or the date of priority, if earlier).

Plant variety rights in the UK

Plant varieties with registered rights in the EU before 1 January 2021 have been given a corresponding UK right.

These plant varieties will have continued protection in the UK.

Change of details

If you want to change any details of your plant variety, contact pvs.helpdesk@apha.gov.uk with your request and EU grant number.

The UK will continue to use the EU grant number for any correspondence.

The UK does not currently have an annual charge for the maintenance of UK plant breeders’ rights.

Rights holders should regularly review this guide for future management changes to PBR in the UK.

Get a consent for genetically modified plants

You must get at least one of the following consents:


  marketing consent for food and animal feed, contact the food standards agency on 020 7276 8829 or helpline@foodstandards.gov.uk

  marketing consent for things that aren’t food or animal feed, contact Defra on 020 7238 2051 or gm-regulation@defra.gov.uk

  consent to do research trials, contact Defra on 020 7238 2051 or gm-regulation@defra.gov.uk



Include a copy of your consent with your application for PBR.

You must also tell the Plant Variety Rights Office if you’re applying for breeders’ rights for a genetically modified plant variety.

Call 020 8026 5993 or contact the Plant Variety Rights Office by post.

How rights can protect your plant varieties

Your rights mean that nobody else without your permission can use your plant species for:


  production or reproduction
  selling or offering for sale
  altering so it can be propagated
  exporting or importing
  keep stock of your plant species for any reason


Your rights last for 25 years for plants or 30 years for trees, vines or potato varieties.

You can give up your rights at any time and rights may be terminated if the variety no longer fulfils its criteria.

Name your variety

You must name your variety. The same name will usually be used in the UK and all EU member states if the variety is accepted.

Choose a name that:


  isn’t already used by a variety of the same species
  can’t be confused with the name of another variety or other goods
  doesn’t cause problems with recognition or production
  accurately represents the variety or its characteristics, for example the name must not suggest that a variety has particular attributes


You can use a trade mark or trade name when you sell seeds of the plant, but the name registered on the national list must be clearly shown on the packaging.

Objections to a proposed name or proposed change of name.
Any person can object to a naming of a variety.  This is known as ‘making a representation’.

Contact APHA to make an objection within 3 months of the decision being published in the gazette. APHA will respond explaining the objections process and how you can pay the £30 fee to make an objection.

PVS will write to you and tell you if your objection is successful or not.

Apply for plant breeders’ rights

All applications for UK Plant Breeders Rights must use the UPOV PRISMA online application process.

Apply online
Apply using UPOV PRISMA, an online tool which helps you make applications with all participating Plant Variety Protection (PVP) Offices.

To apply online you will need to:


  set up an account
  log in
  complete and send your application
  complete the assignment of rights form and authorisation of agent form if assigning rights and/or authorising an agent - upload the forms using the attachment section in the UPOV PRISMA form
  pay the fee


Application closing dates

You can apply for PBR anytime. If you want to be included in a specific year’s test and trials, the application closing dates for agricultural and vegetable crops are the same as the closing dates for National Listing.

There are closing dates for the receipt of plant material. Anything received later will not be tested or trialled in that year.

Ornamental PBR applications have closing dates.

Spring sown agricultural crops


  
    
      Species
      Closing date for receipt of plant material
    
  
  
    
      Spring Wheat
      23 October
    
    
      Annual Meadowgrass, Wood Meadowgrass, Smooth-Stalked Meadowgrass and Rough Stalked Meadowgrass
      15 December
    
    
      Brown Top, Red Top, Creeping Bent and Velvet Bent
      15 January the following year after application
    
    
      Common Vetch
      29 November
    
    
      Spring Lupin, Spring Rye, Spring Spelt Wheat and Spring Triticale
      10 January the following year after application
    
    
      Spring Barley and Spring Oats
      15 January the following year after application
    
    
      Spring Field Pea and Spring Field Bean
      31 January the following year after application
    
    
      Red Clover, Alsike Clover, Meadow Fescue, Tall Oatgrass, Birdsfoot Trefoil, Cocksfoot, Lucerne, Sainfoin, Tall Fescue, Red Fescue (Chewings Fescue), Alaska Brome Grass, Rescue Grass, Black Medick, Hungarian Vetch, Hairy Vetch, Timothy and Small Timothy
      When requested
    
    
      Spring Linseed, Spring Flax, Spring Oilseed Rape
      15 December
    
    
      Ryegrass,  White Clover, Festulolium
      5 February
    
    
      Sunflower
      1 February
    
    
      Sugar Beet
      1 February
    
    
      Spring Forage Rape, Spring Turnip Rape, Fodder Beet (Mangels), Fodder Kale, Swede, Fodder Radish
      15 February
    
    
      Mustard, Potatoes, Hemp
      15 December
    
    
      Maize
      15 February
    
    
      Soya Beans
      15 January
    
  


Autumn sown agricultural crops


  
    
      Species
      Closing date for receipt of plant material
    
  
  
    
      Winter wheat, winter oats and winter lupin
      15 September
    
    
      Winter field beans
      1 October
    
    
      Winter oilseed rape (GM only)
      10 August
    
    
      Winter turnip rape
      31 July
    
    
      Winter field  peas
      1 October
    
    
      Winter forage rape and winter oilseed rape (non GM)
      10 August
    
    
      Winter linseed
      1 September
    
    
      Winter rye, winter spelt wheat and winter triticale
      1 September
    
    
      Winter barley
      8 September
    
  


The UK doesn’t have testing capacity for all the vegetable varieties listed. For the varieties that the UK does not have DUS testing capability for the UK will either purchase the Distinctness, Uniformity and Stability (DUS) report or will entrust another examination office to carry out the DUS testing on behalf of the UK.

Applications for vegetable varieties that the UK does not have DUS testing capability for can be received all year round. However the closing date for receipt of plant material is at the discretion of the entrusted examination office.

Vegetable varieties


  
    
      Species
      Closing date for receipt of plant material
    
  
  
    
      Beetroot
      28 February
    
    
      Broad bean
      15 February
    
    
      Broccoli
      15 March
    
    
      Calabrese
      15 March
    
    
      Brussels sprout
      28 February
    
    
      Cabbage
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Carrot
      31 March
    
    
      Cauliflower
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Celeriac
      15 March
    
    
      Celery
      28 February
    
    
      Chinese cabbage
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Cucumber
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Endive
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      French bean
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Gourds
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Kohlrabi
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Leaf Beet
      28 February
    
    
      Leek (vegetatively propagated)
      15 April the following year after application
    
    
      Leek (seed propagated)
      31 January the following year after application
    
    
      Lettuce
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Marrow
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Melons
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Onions (over wintered)
      15 July
    
    
      Onions (spring sown)
      31 January the following year after application
    
    
      Parsley
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Pea
      15 February
    
    
      Radish
      31 March
    
    
      Runner bean
      31 January the following year after application
    
    
      Shallot (seed propagated)
      28 February
    
    
      Shallot (vegetatively propagated)
      31 March
    
    
      Spinach
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Sweet corn
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Tomatoes
      Purchase of report or date of plant material at the discretion of the entrusted office
    
    
      Turnip
      31 January the following year after application
    
    
      Watercress (seed and vegetatively propagated)
      31 March
    
  


Ornamental crops
This table sets out the closing dates for the main ornamental crops tested at the National Institute of Agricultural Botany (NIAB) for the UK, Community Plant Variety Office (CPVO) and under bilateral agreements.


  
    
      Species or group
      Final closing date for applications
      Submission period for delivery of material
    
  
  
    
      Chrysanthemums, All Year Round Varieties (AYR) Crop 1
      14 August
      11 to 15 January
    
    
      Chrysanthemums, All Year Round Varieties (AYR) Crop 3
      17 February
      5 to 9 July
    
    
      Chrysanthemums, Natural Season varieties, including garden varieties
      1 December
      12 to 16 April
    
    
      Dahlias
      1 December
      10 to 14 May
    
    
      Delphiniums, vegetatively propagated
      1 December
      22 to 26 February and 15 to 26 March, depending on type
    
    
      Delphiniums, seed propagated
      1 December
      25 to 29 January
    
    
      Herbaceous perennials, hardy varieties
      1 December
      15 to 26 March (Different dates will apply to varieties flowering over winter or in very early spring.)
    
    
      Herbaceous perennials, tender varieties and basket/pot plants
      1 December
      26 to 30 April
    
    
      Narcissus
      31 May
      23 to 27 August
    
    
      Roses
      30 September
      1 to 15 November
    
    
      Seed propagated ornamentals
      1 December
      20 to 24 January (Different dates will apply to varieties flowering over winter or in very early spring.)
    
    
      Trees, shrubs and woody climbers
      1 December
      15 to 26 March (Different dates will apply to varieties flowering over winter or in very early spring.)
    
  


Deadlines for ornamentals

Requesting authorities must forward their paperwork to the test centre within 10 working days of the applications.

The deadlines apply to vegetatively propagated varieties except where specifically indicated in the table. They assume all material is container grown except for chrysanthemums which must be supplied in the form of cuttings.

No plant material should be sent until specifically requested.

Contacts
This table shows who you should contact for different plant and vegetable varieties.


  
    
      Varieties
      Contact Name
      Telephone
      Email
    
  
  
    
      Wheat, oats, barley, triticale, rye, spelt wheat and sugar beet
      Michael Tyndall
      020 7714 1321
      michael.tyndall@apha.gov.uk
    
    
      Herbage, oilseed rape, forage rape, forage kale, turnip rape, swede, agricultural and vegetable conservation varieties, amateur vegetables, vegetables, fodder beet and fodder radish
      Rebecca Harding
      077 6568 6620
      rebecca.harding@apha.gov.uk
    
    
      Potatoes, ornamentals, fruit, maize, field pea, field bean, soya bean, sunflower, linseed and flax
      Anneleen Van-Malderen
      020 8720 4171
      anneleen.van.malderen@apha.gov.uk
    
    
      Integrated VCU trials
      Jeremy Widdowson BSPB House 114 Lancaster Way Business Park, Ely CB6 3NX
      013 5365 3846
      jeremy.widdowson@bspb.co.uk
    
    
      Address for delivery of plant material for ornamental crops
      Tara Sheldrake, NIAB, Park Farm, Villa Road, Impington, Cambridge,  CB24 9NZ
       
       
    
  


Fees

The UPOV PRISMA service fee is 90 Swiss francs (CHF), which must be paid directly to UPOV PRISMA when you apply.

APHA will issue invoices for the administration fee for UK Plant Breeders’ Rights applications.

The invoice will be issued following publication of the application in the Seeds Gazette. In the majority of cases this will be in the month following APHA receiving your application. For example, an application received by APHA during January will be invoiced in late February.

You’ll be invoiced for the costs of testing.

Read the updated national listings variety lists and plant breeders rights fees  (PDF, 124KB, 6 pages) to calculate the total amount.

After you’ve applied

Your PBR will be granted within 2 months if your variety has already been shown to be distinct, uniform and stable.

Get your seed and plant materials tested

APHA will ask you to send the seed or plant material for testing if your variety hasn’t already been tested for national listing. They’ll tell you how much material to send and when.

Testing takes:


  1 year for ornamentals
  3 years for trees
  4 years for herbage varieties
  2 years for other species


Extra tests of parental species might be needed if you’re registering hybrid varieties.

The method of testing is approved by PVS, and is done by:


  
the National Institute of Agricultural Botany (England and Wales)
  
Science and Advice for Scottish Agriculture (Scotland)
  
the Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute (Northern Ireland)


PVS will send you copies of the results of your tests.

Get a published decision

The PVS will then publish the proposed decision on whether to accept or refuse the variety in its monthly gazette. All test results are then made available to anyone on request.

You’ll get breeders’ rights if:


  the variety is distinct, uniform and stable
  nobody has objected
  no new evidence shows that the proposed decision is wrong


New listed varieties are published in the gazette, together with the name of the person who owns the rights and any agents.

Monthly Gazette
The Plant Variety and Seeds Office publishes a gazette giving notice about any of the following UK National List applications:


  application accepted
  application which is withdrawn
  proposed, approved and changed names
  proposed decision to accept or refuse a plant variety on to the National List
  proposed grants
  decision of the tribunal made on an appeal
  changes to a National List award or application
  grants and/or awards
  proposed surrenders/proposed deletions
  surrenders or deletions


You can use the gazette to follow the progress of an application through the Plant Breeders’ Rights and National Lists process.

Special edition
The UK National Lists of varieties of Agricultural Plant Species and Vegetable Plant Species are published monthly in the Special Edition of the Plant Varieties and Seeds Gazette.

These lists are valid as of the last day of the month of the edition as published. Amendments to these lists are published in the monthly Plant Varieties and Seeds Gazette.

The gazette includes the contacts for the address codes for the National Lists awards.

Previous Issues of the Plant Varieties and Seeds Gazette or Special Edition.
If you need an earlier edition, email NLPBR-Applications@apha.gov.uk.

Change the name

You need to pay if you want to change a name after rights have been granted.

If you’re refused plant breeders’ rights
You can object to a decision if you’ve been refused PBR. This is known as ‘making a representation’. You must do this by email or by post within 14 days of the decision being published in the gazette.

Appeal against a refusal

You’ll receive a letter from PVS if the original decision is not overturned.

You can then make an appeal to Plant Varieties and Seeds Tribunal. Write to the address given in the letter.

If you lose your rights documents

Contact PVRO to get a replacement copy of your Grant of Rights.

End your rights

You can end your rights at any time by contacting the PVRO.

You can also give your rights to someone else. Fill in an assignment of rights form and send it to the PVRO.

When you can be forced to give licences

For the first 2 years of you getting PBR, only you can licence other people to use your variety.

After 2 years, any person can apply for a compulsory licence if:


  they feel that you ‘unreasonably’ refused to grant the licence
  you imposed ‘unreasonable’ terms on a granted licence


The applicant will need to contact PVRO and show:


  a licence is necessary to ensure the variety is available to the public at a reasonable price, is widely distributed, or quality is maintained
  the applicant can and wants to exploit the variety in a professional way


Take someone to court

You can take someone to court if you think they are using your plant varieties without your permission.

First, you need to ask them about the source of the suspected plant material. You should treat all information you receive as confidential.

If they don’t give you this information you can start infringement proceedings in court.

Contact the Plant Variety Rights Office

Contact the Plant Variety Rights Office at:



Plant Variety Rights Office
Animal and Plant Health Agency 
Eastbrook 
Shaftesbury Road 
Cambridge 
CB2 8DR 
United Kingdom



Tel: +44 (0) 208 026 5993

Email: NLPBR-Applications@apha.gov.uk





      
        
    Published 7 September 2012
    Last updated 11 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 November 2021
              The closing date for the receipt of samples for spring linseed, spring flax and spring oilseed rape has been changed to 15 December.
            
            
              9 November 2021
              Removed ‘discovered’ from ‘who can apply’ section. You can only apply for plant breeders’ rights if you’ve bred or developed a plant variety, or if you’ve been chosen by the breeder as their successor.
            
            
              10 September 2021
              Contact details updated
            
            
              3 February 2021
              New section - Plant varieties with registered rights in the EU before 1 January 2021 have been given a corresponding UK right.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              Updates to email address for applications, update to fees, new information on applying through UPOV PRISMA, new table of closing dates and submission periods for ornamental crops.
            
            
              14 December 2020
              Updated the costs for different varieties document in the fees section.
            
            
              14 August 2020
              New information about the monthly gazette and seeds edition, tables of different plant varieties and closing dates for applications.
            
            
              3 August 2020
              Updated the fees pay by credit card telephone number.
            
            
              31 May 2019
              Added information about how to apply online
            
            
              15 October 2018
              National Listing and Plant Breeders Rights fees updated.
            
            
              8 June 2018
              Fees document updated
            
            
              9 October 2017
              Updated address for pay by cheque
            
            
              18 November 2015
              Reviewed and redrafted in line with GOV.UK style and Defra guidance review
            
            
              14 December 2012
              Removed the association with Natural England as it is not part of their remit.
            
            
              7 September 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        National list and plant breeders’ rights: submit seeds
        Add a new plant variety to the national list
        Plant Varieties and Seeds Gazette
        Farm Saved Seed
        Guides and forms for plant varieties and seeds applications

  




      

    Collection

  


        Guides and forms for plant varieties and seeds applications
        Marking, labelling and marketing standards for imports and exports

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crops and horticulture 

  


  

  


    
  


    