
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Make privacy integral
  

  
  
  
      
  Make sure citizens’ rights are protected by integrating privacy as an essential part of your system.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      6 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About the EU General Data Protection Regulation

        
        
          How privacy by design will help your programme

        
        
          How to embed privacy by design

        
        
          Related guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet point 7 of the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) your plans must show how you are using privacy by design.

If you’re going through the spend control process you must explain how you’re meeting point 7.


The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


About the EU General Data Protection Regulation

The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) provides information about the GDPR. The Technology Code of Practice summarises the key points.

The GDPR came into force on 25 May 2018. It’s about protecting citizens’ personal data when it is being processed or moved.

You must comply with this new regulation and consider the ethical and appropriate use of data and technology.

GDPR is adopting privacy by design as part of the regulation. There is a legal requirement in the GDPR for the protection of citizens’ data to be included from the start of the design process. GDPR includes upfront penalties for not complying.

Maintaining the privacy of citizens’ personal data includes security. Privacy also includes how citizens:


  consent to the use of their personal data
  have the right to have personal data erased
  have the right to restrict the processing of personal data
  have the right to data portability so they can access and move their personal data


How privacy by design will help your programme

Your technology project or programme will benefit from:


  being proactive about privacy and reducing the risks of data theft
  identifying potential privacy issues earlier when they are easier and cheaper to solve
  better awareness of privacy issues across the organisation
  adherence to GDPR when it comes into law


How to embed privacy by design

The Data Protection Act 2018 contains details about how the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) applies in the UK.

The ICO has a guide on GDPR and suggest using impact assessments in the section  on accountability and governance as part of your project or programmes risk management process. The following questions from the Data protection impact assessments are useful to consider:


  Will the project or programme involve the collection of new information about individuals?
  Will individuals have to provide information about themselves to the project or programme?
  Will information about individuals be disclosed to organisations or people who have not previously had routine access to the information?
  Are you using information about individuals for a purpose it is not currently used for, or in a way it is not currently used?
  Does the project or programme involve you using new technology that might be perceived as being privacy intrusive? For example, the use of biometrics or facial recognition.
  Will the project or programme result in you making decisions or taking action against individuals in ways that can have a significant impact on them?
  Is the information about individuals of a kind particularly likely to raise privacy concerns or expectations? For example, health records, criminal records or other information that people would consider to be private.
  Will the project or programme require you to contact individuals in ways that they may find intrusive?



Next: Technology Code of Practice point 8 - Share, reuse and collaborate


Related guides


  Government technology standards and guidance
  EU General Data Protection Regulation
  Data Protection Act 2018
  European Commission - Protection of personal data
  GDPR summary of legislation
  UK Digital Strategy
  Data Science Ethical Framework





      
        
    Published 6 November 2017
    Last updated 31 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 March 2021
              Addition of a temporary research survey to get user feedback on the Technology Code of Practice.
            
            
              5 June 2018
              Inclusion of a link to the new Data Protection Act 2018 and associated information from the Information Commissioner's Office
            
            
              6 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Manage your data for access and reuse
        Open Source guidance
        Develop your data and APIs using a reference architecture
        Choose tools and infrastructure to make better use of your data
        Define user needs

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    