The International Security Program (ISP) at the Harvard Kennedy School and the Security Studies Program (SSP) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) invite applications for a ONE-year, pre- or post-doctoral fellowship in Grand Strategy, Security, and Statecraft. The program is supported by a grant from the Charles Koch Foundation and is open to applicants from political science, history, and other relevant disciplines. It is intended to support research addressing fundamental issues of U.S. grand strategy, foreign policy, and America's role in the world: Projects that are likely to broaden the contemporary debate on these topics are of particular interest.Each institution will host one fellow during academic year 2202–2203, who will spend one year in residence and will be expected to participate in activities in both programs during the fellowship year. (The fellowship normally starts in late August). ISP and SSP will provide office space and a computer, and fellows will have access to the Harvard and MIT libraries and most of the other facilities of the university at which they are located.Pre-doctoral research fellows are expected to work on—and ideally complete—their doctoral dissertations during the fellowship and must have passed their general examinations and made significant progress (three chapters) on a thesis in order to be eligible.Post-doctoral fellows must have their Ph.D. in hand by the beginning of the fellowship period and are expected to work on a book, monograph, or other significant publication during their period of residence. All fellows are expected to be in residence for the duration of the fellowship and to participate on a regular basis in weekly seminars and research colloquia.The Program offers a ten-month stipend of 75,000 USD for postdoctoral research fellows and 55,000 USD for predoctoral fellows. Each institution offers reimbursement for some health insurance premiums, according to its own policies.The joint program is directed by Barry Posen, Ford Professor of Political Science at MIT and former director of SSP and Stephen Walt, Robert and Renée Belfer Professor of International Affairs at the Harvard Kennedy School and Faculty Chair of ISP.Interested applicants should submit a 3–5 page statement, a CV, three letters of recommendation, and a writing sample (including thesis chapters for pre-docs) to the following email address: .Applications will all be considered together by ISP and SSP, and once offers are made and accepted, the programs will decide with the prospective fellows which institution will host them for the year.. Awards will be announced in March 2022.