

The authors examine indicators of education and labor markets in the Appalachia Partnership Initiative (API) region, with a focus on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, and on the extraction industry. The authors look at how the indicators have changed over time, tighten some of their analysis specifically to the API region, and introduce new measures, such as participation in career and technical education.




Read Online

Education, Employment, and Wages in the Appalachia Region
Final Report (2020)
by Matthew D. Baird, Gerald P. Hunter, Nathaniel Edenfield, Nicholas Broten, Gabriella C. Gonzalez
Related Topics: Employment and Unemployment, Energy, Engineers and Engineering, Labor Markets, Ohio, Pennsylvania, STEM Education, Wages and Compensation, West Virginia, Workforce Development
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


3.9 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

Are education and training providers producing a qualified workforce that will find employment in the region‘s evolving STEM labor market?What types of jobs and occupations have the highest employment and earnings?Where do workers in the mining and extraction industry come from?



The authors of this report aim to understand the health of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and labor market in the Appalachia region — defined as the intersection of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia — with a focus on the mining and extraction industry.
This report is the third in a three-part series. The first two reports provided initial examinations of STEM education and the labor market in the Appalachia Partnership Initiative (API) region. In this report, the authors address the same questions as the first two reports but devote more attention to examining whether and how any of the indicators have changed over time. The authors also tighten the analysis specifically to the API region and introduces a few new measures, such as participation in career and technical education (CTE).
Key Findings

Middle school students in the API states have outperformed students nationwide in mathematics, and trends are improving over time.
CTE in the API region has room for growth.
High school graduation rates are high and improving.
Although postsecondary enrollment decreased in the API region over time, the percentage of students graduating in STEM has been increasing and outstripping the national average.
The working-age population declined within the API region.
Median earnings were higher in suburban areas of the API region and lowest in parts of the urban centers, but there was no clear geographic pattern of growth in median earnings.
Earnings were high and growing in the mining and utilities industry in the API region.
The mining and extraction industry was particularly successful at compensating workers who held a high school degrees or had less education.
New hires from outside the extraction industry in API states primarily came from within the region but from other industries and enjoyed large earnings increases.



 Related Products 









Report
Wages, Employment, and STEM Education in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia

Mar 9, 2016
Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Kyle Siler-Evans, et al.










Report
Wages, Employment, and STEM Education in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia

Mar 22, 2017
Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Kyle Siler-Evans, et al.










Project
The Appalachia Partnership Initiative

Mar 9, 2016







Research conducted by

RAND Education and Labor
RAND Social and Economic Well-Being



This research was sponsored by the Appalachia Partnership Initiative (API) and conducted by RAND Education and Labor and RAND Social and RAND Social and Economic Well-Being.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 36
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR3217
Document Number: RR-3217-CHC
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Employment and UnemploymentEnergyEngineers and EngineeringLabor MarketsOhioPennsylvaniaSTEM EducationWages and CompensationWest VirginiaWorkforce Development

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Baird, Matthew D., Gerald P. Hunter, Nathaniel Edenfield, Nicholas Broten, and Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Education, Employment, and Wages in the Appalachia Region: Final Report (2020). Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR3217.html.
Baird, Matthew D., Gerald P. Hunter, Nathaniel Edenfield, Nicholas Broten, and Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Education, Employment, and Wages in the Appalachia Region: Final Report (2020), Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-3217-CHC, 2020. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR3217.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



