
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Tackling loneliness with transport fund
  

  
  

  
    
  Public and charity sectors are invited to apply for grants of up to £500,000 to pilot projects that aim to reduce loneliness through transport schemes.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Transport

      
      Published
      10 December 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Tackling loneliness with transport fund: guidance for applicants
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Tackling loneliness with transport fund: expression of interest form
    
        ODT, 356 KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webmasterdft@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This project, funded by Her Majesty’s Treasury’s Shared Outcomes Fund and led by the Department for Transport (DfT), aims to develop the evidence base for how transport can help to alleviate loneliness.

The project will offer grant funding to the public and charity sectors to run pilot transport schemes that aim to reduce loneliness. The pilots will be measured and evaluated rigorously, enabling DfT to:


  understand more about how transport can be used to help reduce loneliness
  share findings with organisations within and outside government


DfT wants to empower local authorities, third sector organisations and charities to consider the role of transport in tackling loneliness.


The deadline for applications is 11:59pm on 28 January 2022. Send your completed application to tacklingloneliness@dft.gov.uk.





        
      

      
    Published 10 December 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Local transport
        Transport accessibility and mobility
        Loneliness

  


  

  


    
  


    