
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Ministry of Defence Procurement Organisations
  

  
  
  
      
  Information about the different organisations Defence procurement buy their equipment, products and services through. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      29 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        1 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The MOD buys a diverse range of equipment, products and services through a variety of organisations. Below is a list of some of these organisations and links to their dedicated pages which contain more information about what they do.

Defence Equipment and Support

DE&S manage a vast range of complex projects to buy, support and supply vital equipment and services that the Royal Navy, British Army and Royal Air Force need to operate effectively.
The programme of work ranges from jets and warships through to armoured vehicles and field kitchens.

Defence Infrastructure Organisation

The Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO) is the estate expert for defence, supporting the armed forces to enable military capability by planning, building, maintaining, and servicing infrastructure.

Defence Digital

The Defence Digital organisation is responsible for making sure that effective digital and information technology (D&IT) is put into the hands of the military and business front line. They lead on defensive cyber strategy, capability development and policy, whilst also supplying IT to 200,000 users across over 2000 defence sites across UK and globally.

Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) ensures that innovative science and technology contribute to the defence and security of the UK. DSTL supply sensitive and specialist science and technology services for MOD and wider government.

Team Leidos

Team Leidos provide essential services such as storage and distribution for the MOD’s materiel, including a global freight service and procurement and inventory management of food, packed fuels, clothing, medical materiel and general supplies.

Further information on the Logistic Commodities & Services Transformation LCS(T) contract with Leidos Supply Ltd, including future opportunities and bidder registration can be found on the Leidos Supply Ltd. website.

Strategic Command

Strategic Command support MOD by making sure that joint capabilities such as medical services, training and education, intelligence and information systems are developed and managed across all 5 of the land, sea, air, space and cyber domains. They also manage overseas joint operations.

British Army

The British Army protects the United Kingdom’s interests at home and abroad, providing a safe and secure environment in which all British citizens can live and prosper.

Royal Navy

In times of peace and conflict, the Royal Navy is key to Britain’s prosperity and success. they help to stabilise the seas, keeping the maritime trade that’s the lifeblood of the UK economy flowing. They act as a guardian and a diplomat, as a humanitarian force for good, and a peacekeeper on the global stage.

Royal Air Force

The RAF defend the skies of Britain. They work with our UK and international partners to watch the skies, respond to threats, prevent conflict, and provide assistance in an uncertain world.

Related information

Procurement at MOD





      
        
    Published 29 October 2020
    Last updated 1 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 April 2021
              Updated the link to the Royal Navy site to direct to the new Royal Navy Procurement page on GOV.UK.
            
            
              29 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Innovation in the Defence Supply Chain
        Supply chain opportunities
        Frameworks Agreements
        MOD contracting, purchasing and finance: e-procurement system
        CDE themed competition: joining advanced materials and structures

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Government
        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    