
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Piloting an Ecosystem of Trust- Expression of Interest
  

  
  

  
    
  Government is calling on industry to submit their interest in piloting the Ecosystem of Trust concept that was outlined on our 2025 UK Border strategy.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Cabinet Office

      
      Published
      6 December 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Invitation for Expressions of Interest - Ecosystem of Trust pilot
    
        PDF, 603 KB, 25 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publiccorrespondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Expression of interest form - Ecosystem of Trust pilot
    
        PDF, 64.3 KB, 3 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publiccorrespondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
As set out in the 2025 UK Border Strategy, Government are looking to use data, technology and trusted relationships to deliver robust upstream compliance which would allow processes to be moved away from the frontier and facilitate improved flow of goods. This Ecosystem of Trust concept will be delivered in partnership with users of the border and the border industry to develop a world leading technology enabled border.

In order to pilot the concept we are inviting stakeholders with an interest in the movement of goods, to express their interest in partaking in a pilot over the course of 2022. Initial expressions of interest are due by 31st of January 2022 and following this we will hold workshops with interested parties to set out the key challenges any solution will need to overcome. This will allow consortia to set out project proposals for their pilots which will be assessed with the best proposals taken forward from May.



        
      

      
    Published 6 December 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Border Innovation Hub
        Technology and Innovation Roadmap
        API's
        Opportunities and funding
        Education in the north of England: review of evidence

  




      

    Collection

  


        Border Innovation Hub

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Brexit

  


  

  


    
  


    