
        
        
        
    especially now that mass vaccinations are gaining momentum. Health and the economy are inextricably linked. While the final health and economic toll is still unknown, in the first year of the pandemic more than half a million lives were lost in Europe, and . Yet what may not be widely appreciated is that each year, poor health costs the European economy on average about twice as much or about 15 percent of GDP from reduced quality of life, premature deaths, and lost productivity. As Europe emerges from the current health crisis, there is an opportunity not only to fix the problems exposed by the pandemic but also to save lives, improve overall quality of life, and build greater resilience against future health crises, all while promoting economic growth and greater prosperity.
        


    
    In this article, we build on the McKinsey Global Institute’s global report, , to look more closely at Europe and identify what it would take to improve the health of the European population and what the benefits would be for individuals, the economy, and society. (See sidebar, “Our methodology.”) We focus on the 27 member states of the European Union, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. We analyze disease burden and economic forecasts over two decades to 2040 to identify challenges and opportunities at the country level and aggregate findings for the region as a whole. 1. The $2.7 trillion annual cost of poor healthThe COVID-19 pandemic is an extreme example of how health, and the measures taken to control and suppress the spread of an infectious disease, can affect the economy. However, even before the pandemic, poor health cost Europe on average about $2.7 trillion, or 15 percent of GDP a year, in lost economic opportunity, equivalent to about $5,000 per person (Exhibit 1). 
    

	
Poor health reduces economic potential by keeping people out of the workforce, reducing productivity, and lowering earning potential. For example, a person may leave the workforce temporarily or permanently as a result of poor health, or move to a less physically or emotionally demanding role with lower remuneration. Others may reduce their work-related commitments to care for dependents who are living with poor health and disability. Premature mortality, in addition to being a tragedy, affects the size of the workforce and therefore economic output. Our analysis looks exclusively at the lost economic opportunity of poor health in the labor market, including the overall supply of labor, unemployment, underemployment, and productivity. Poor health also affects people’s lives in many noneconomic ways, by causing pain and worry, lowering independence, and limiting people’s capacity to participate in daily activities, enjoy life, and realize their individual potential.2. The health improvement opportunityThree conditions have a disproportionate economic impact and collectively are responsible for more than half of all the lost economic potential due to poor health in Europe. These are: musculoskeletal disorders, particularly low back pain and neck pain, accounting for 24 percent of the total economic loss from poor health; mental health disorders, such as depression and anxiety, accounting for 18 percent; and neurological disorders such as migraine and headache, accounting for 13 percent.These three conditions are relatively common, predominantly affect people of working age, and have a relatively high impact on daily life and productivity because they tend to be associated with chronic pain and distress.  conducted in the United Kingdom found that the conditions are significant predictors of early retirement, with more than half of early retirees reporting one or more of them. Similar patterns are found in . Contributing to the overall disease burden are high levels of preventable health risks, particularly , which exist across Europe and affect all social groups, though disproportionately those in .  (aged 50+) in 20 European countries found that four out of five respondents reported living with a chronic condition and half of those aged 50+ were living with multiple long-term conditions. The impact of Europe’s underlying health vulnerability was exposed during the pandemic. People with  were estimated to be about 40 to 90 percent more likely to experience severe disease and death compared to their lower weight and healthier peers. 3. Prevention is keyWe estimate that the health burden could be reduced by about 30 percent over the next two decades with more timely and consistent application of interventions available today. A 30 percent reduction in the expected disease burden would lead to tremendous health improvements. An average 65-year-old in Europe in 2040 could be as healthy as a 55-year-old today, and 11 million more people would be alive by 2040.
Almost all of this potential health improvement—about 85 percent of the total—would arise from addressing avoidable ill health related to noncommunicable diseases, such as heart disease and stroke, diabetes and its complications, chronic respiratory conditions including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma, cancers, musculoskeletal conditions including chronic pain, and neurological disorders including dementias, migraine, and headaches. The remaining 15 percent would result from reducing injuries from road traffic accidents, falls, and self-harm, and reducing the risk from infectious diseases, addressing nutritional deficiencies, and making childbirth even safer. Our research suggests that two-thirds of the improvement opportunity lies in areas of health promotion, prevention, health literacy, and healthier environments with more consistent, comprehensive, and early use of widely available and highly cost-effective strategies (Exhibit 2). Investment in creating the conditions for health could reduce disparities in health outcomes between different groups, relieve pressure on acute health services, and increase resilience in the face of future health-related challenges and shocks.  
    
4. Innovation remains an imperativeEven if preventive and therapeutic interventions deliver as anticipated, we estimate that about 50 percent of all ill health forecast in Europe in 2040 is not addressable with the tools and solutions at hand or coming onstream in the next few years. That means innovation remains an imperative for improving health.Based on today’s innovation pipeline, our analysis indicates that the burden of poor health could be reduced by a further 20 percent. The pace and efficiency of implementation could also be enhanced, particularly if the acceleration in the use of digital and data in health, catalyzed by the COVID-19 crisis, continues to drive toward fuller transformation of our approach to health and care that is more proactive and preventative, informed by data and intelligent analytics, and centered on the patient. Our estimate is based on a systematic survey of current pipelines in clinical research and development to understand future innovations. : omics and molecular technology, next-generation pharmaceuticals, cellular therapy and regenerative medicine, innovative vaccines, advanced surgical procedures, connected and cognitive devices, electroceuticals, robotics and prosthetics, digital therapeutics, and tech-enabled care delivery. In each of these areas of innovation, small-scale pilots and applications already exist. For instance, surgical robots are being used successfully for a variety of surgeries, especially treatments for prostate cancer. Today about 20 advanced therapies based on omics and molecular technologies as well as cell therapy are on the market in the United States, including gene therapies targeting muscular atrophy and a genetic vision disorder, and cell therapy targeting leukemia.5. How big is the economic prize?We calculate that better health could contribute $2.4 trillion to Europe’s GDP by 2040, equivalent to a 10 percent boost or an additional 0.5 percentage point of annual growth above current projections, and reverse an expected contraction of the labor force. There are four channels of economic impact from health improvement (Exhibit 3): 
    

    Fewer health conditions. Lower levels of poor health in the population would reduce sick leave and absences from work as well as long-term disability. This channel accounts for 29 percent of the total economic impact from health improvement. 
    Fewer early deaths. Because average life expectancy is already relatively high in Europe compared to other parts of the world, and considerably in excess of typical retirement age, this channel has a relatively small economic impact, contributing just 5 percent to the total economic impact.
    Expanded labor force participation. If more people were healthier for longer and fewer employment opportunities were curtailed by the need to provide informal care, we anticipate that more people may choose to work, and to work for longer, to find personal fulfillment and to increase their income at retirement. If the effective age at retirement shifted out by five years on average, combined with higher rates of economic participation for people with disabilities and informal caregivers, we estimate that this could boost GDP across the region by $1.3 trillion, 53 percent of the total economic impact.  Health improvement at this scale could reverse expected labor force shortages in Europe over the next two decades, amounting to a 10 percent boost in the size of the workforce by 2040 (Exhibit 4).
    Higher productivity. Finally, the impact of improved health on health-related presenteeism could contribute 14 percent of the total economic impact through improved productivity of the workforce.

    
The opportunity to unlock economic growth is shared across the region, with all 29 countries seeing a boost to GDP in 2040 of 5 to 16 percent from investing in improving health (Exhibit 5). Country-level differences in the scale of additional growth depend on a range of factors, including the underlying age structure and health profile of the population, as well as the levels of addressable poor health in working-age groups and those in later middle age combined with levels of economic participation in later middle age cohorts.
    
While harder to measure, the societal benefits from these health improvements far exceed the economic benefits and may be about $8 trillion by 2040. Beyond the capacity to work and increase their earnings potential, better health would give people the freedom to spend their leisure time on what they want to do most. This includes older people, many of whom may choose to give back to society in other ways after retirement.6. The benefits outweigh the costsWe estimate that for every dollar invested in improving the health of the population in Europe, about $2.50 in economic benefit could result. Our analysis shows that in Europe and other high-income regions, between 50 and 60 percent of the total health improvement that could be achieved with wider uptake and more consistent adoption and adherence to existing interventions could be delivered for less than $1,000 per healthy life year gained (Exhibit 6). 
    
In many European countries, cardiovascular disease prevention, diabetes prevention, and aggressive smoking cessation strategies have the potential for very high impact. For example, an initiative in the Netherlands that provides daily remote monitoring and coaching for cardiac patients at home has led to a 52 percent reduction in hospital admissions, 26 percent lower costs, and high levels of patient and clinician satisfaction. At the same time, there is a need to address overuse of some therapies and in particular antibiotics, where there is a risk that patterns of use today will create new health threats in the future,  and depleting the arsenal of treatments available for serious infections. However, this does not mean additional funding for healthcare as currently delivered. The health benefits and the economic upside we calculate will not be possible without fundamental changes in not just where and how healthcare is delivered today, but also in how we build communities that help individuals grow up, work, and age in healthy ways.7. How to capture the healthy growth opportunityHealth economists have long understood the role of rising life expectancy and improvements in population health in driving economic growth, comparable to investment in education. Similarly,  around the world have been calling for a shift toward more prevention-focused and primary care for decades. While increasing the availability and early uptake of the interventions we outline in our research will not be easy, as Europe emerges from the COVID-19 crisis, Europeans have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to rethink the role of health in a postpandemic future and make changes. The gravity of the COVID-19 crisis and the sense that many mature European health systems—long lauded as among the best in the world— as underprepared and poorly organized to respond to an emergency of this magnitude is already driving fresh thinking and energy for reform and investment in health systems resilience and security. In December 2020, the European Parliament agreed to a threefold increase in its budget for health (€9.4 billion from 2021–27) to fund the  building on lessons learned during the pandemic. Its mission is to strengthen cross-border health cooperation, pandemic preparedness, data sharing, and systems resilience, including boosting primary care.Health leaders have never been more politically relevant or enjoyed such a central strategic place in the regional and national debate on the management of the crisis and the economic and societal recovery that will follow. Building on this momentum, we identify four ways to capture the healthy growth opportunity:
    
    
    
    
European citizens have, for the most part, long enjoyed universal health coverage and access to high-quality care. This does not mean that they have avoided widespread  experienced by members of society with lower incomes or belonging to marginalized communities, and cruelly . There is now an opportunity to rethink resource allocation, funding, and delivery models to achieve a fairer distribution of resources and outcomes, enhance value and improve access, and provide better health for all. 