
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED Sustainable Urban Development (ICT, SME Support and Low Carbon): call in Nottingham (OC08R20S 1045)
  

  
  
  
    
  Sustainable Urban Development call to run a project to enhance access to, and use and quality of, Information and Communications Technology; enhance the competitiveness of small and medium sized enterprises; and support the shift towards a low carbon economy in Nottingham.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      22 January 2020
      Last updated
      
        11 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      
Business support, IT and broadband, Low carbon

      Location: 
      East Midlands
      Funding source: 
      European Regional Development Fund
      Closing date: 
      10 March 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          What happens next

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Details

This call is looking to enhance access to, and use and quality of, Information and Communications Technology; enhance the competitiveness of small and medium sized enterprises; and support the shift towards a low carbon economy and more specifically:


  Developing Information and Communications Technology products and services, e-commerce, and enhancing demand for Information and Communications Technology
  Promoting entrepreneurship, in particular by facilitating the economic exploitation of new ideas and fostering the creation of new firms, including through business incubators
  Supporting the creation and the extension of advanced capacities for products, services and development
  Supporting the capacity of small and medium sized enterprises to grow in regional, national and international markets and to engage in innovation processes
  Promoting the production and distribution of energy derived from renewable sources
  Promoting energy efficiency and renewable energy use in enterprises
  Supporting energy efficiency, smart energy management and renewable energy use in public infrastructure, including in public buildings, and in the housing sector
  Promoting low-carbon strategies for all types of territories, in particular for urban areas, including the promotion of sustainable multimodal urban mobility and mitigation-relevant adaptation measures
  Promoting research and innovation in, and adoption of, low-carbon technologies


For more information, download the call specification.

Please note regarding eligibility: ERDF uses a fixed method to set hourly rates for staff working part of their time on a project, see section 5 of the ERDF Eligibility Guidance. Rates can be reviewed on an annual basis to reflect changes in wages. Please take this into account when setting your project budget.

Location

Project’s put forward under this call must cover the D2N2 Local Enterprise Partnership area.

Value

Up to £8,531,445 of funding is available through this call (£887,374 under Priority Axis 2, £3,595,147 under Priority Axis 3 and £4,048,924 under Priority Axis 4). A minimum value of £400,000 of funding can be applied for.

Deadlines

Outline application deadline: 10 March 2020

Completion date

Projects approved through this call will normally be expected to:


  Submit a detailed and complete full application within three months of formal selection at outline stage. Projects which fail to meet this deadline may be deselected;
  Commence delivery within the agreed timescale as stated in the Grant Funding Agreement; and
  Have completed the delivery of project activity by the end of June 2023.


How to apply

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and send the Outline Application form to the email address provided in the call document. The guidance provides information to help you complete the form. The form and guidance can be found here.

Please make sure that you are using the latest version of the form and guidance from our website to submit your application.

You are also advised to read the details in the call documents in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the Operational Programme.  All this information, the related guidance and the European Regional Development Fund Operational Programme can be found from our home page.

You may also find it helpful to see details regarding Technical Assistance projects. Details of these can be found on our website.

What happens next

If your outline application is successful, we’ll contact you and ask you to make a full application.

Contact details

If you have a question, contact EM.ERDFenquiries@communities.gov.uk.

Call reference number: OC08R20S 1045




      

      
        
    Published 22 January 2020
    Last updated 11 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 March 2020
              This call has now closed.
            
            
              22 January 2020
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    