
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Digital, Data and Technology expertise to support delivery
  

  
  
  
      
  Get Digital, data and technology specialist advice and people to help deliver programmes and projects

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      1 December 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          What support is available

        
        
          GDS managed suppliers

        
        
          How to get support

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
At GDS we have a team who support digital transformation by providing expert advice, support and people with specialist skills.

We work with government organisations including:


  central government
  departments and agencies
  devolved administrations
  local authorities


We do this by providing expert advice, support and people with specialist skills. Read more about what else GDS does.

What support is available

We offer support from advice and guidance through to providing delivery teams who help design and build digital services and products.

We follow the principles in the service standard, service manual, technology code of practice and Digital, Data and Technology functional standard to ensure we build consistently, maintain quality, continue to learn from our experience and build capability in the government’s Digital, Data and Technology profession.

As well as providing support from the GDS team, we work with specialist suppliers who have been procured using digital marketplace through open and transparent competition so we can offer our support to urgent priority projects.

We work with government organisations to help them:


  understand the problem that can benefit from a digital, data or technology solution
  find the right team to deliver an outcome fast
  provide an individual or team to give expert advice over time


GDS managed suppliers

We procure suppliers from the market who can deliver urgent digital, data and technology specialists and outcomes. GDS manages these contracts, but any public body that uses them will pay the supplier for the service.

Our contracts with suppliers are designed to help urgent and on demand programmes and projects with immediate gaps in skills or capacity that need to be filled quickly.

We provide mixed teams of civil servants, suppliers and specialists as described in the government’s Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework.

You can view details about the procurement of the suppliers we are currently working with:


  BJSS
  Engine Partners
  LA international / Hippo Digital
  Thoughtworks


How to get support

To find out how we can help you please contact us at:

gds-departmental-services@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk




      
        
    Published 1 December 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    