
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Seafood Fund: Seafood Innovation Fund
  

  
  
  
      
  How to apply for research and development funding from the UK Seafood Innovation Fund (SIF) scheme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      19 July 2019
      Last updated
      
        13 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About the UK Seafood Fund

        
        
          About the Seafood Innovation Fund

        
        
          Who can apply

        
        
          Eligibility

        
        
          Funding opportunities

        
        
          Expression of Interest

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          If your application is declined

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The UK government’s Seafood Innovation Fund (SIF) is a research and development (R&D) fund that launched in July 2019. The SIF programme is now part of the UK Seafood Fund. A third call for applications is now open.

About the UK Seafood Fund

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) manages the £100 million UK Seafood Fund to invest in the long-term sustainability of the UK fisheries and seafood sector. The UK Seafood Fund is divided between:


  science and innovation
  infrastructure
  skills and training


Defra will publish details of funding for infrastructure and skills and training when they are available.

The Fisheries Industry Science Partnerships (FISP) scheme and the existing SIF programme share the funding allocated to the science and innovation part of the UK Seafood Fund.

The Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas) administers the SIF scheme. Defra administers the FISP scheme.

About the Seafood Innovation Fund

The SIF programme focuses on:


  delivering longer term, cutting-edge innovation across the seafood sector
  helping to take innovative ideas from early-stage research to commercial viability


The programme includes:


  primary producers
  onshore supply chains
  marine and diadromous fisheries
  marine and land-based aquaculture


The programme excludes:


  freshwater fishing
  recreational fishing


More information and resources can be found on the SIF website. This site includes information about projects funded in previous calls.

Who can apply

This is an open competition. Cefas welcomes applications from all sectors. Your products or services must benefit the sustainability and productivity of the UK seafood industry. Applications for collaborative projects that include both seafood sector organisations and technology businesses are encouraged.

Eligibility

The programme supports the research and development of new innovative ideas. It does not provide backing for existing commercial technology.

To be considered for funding you must:


  provide an innovative idea or solution relevant to the seafood sector
  demonstrate long-term sustainability and environmental benefits
  be from an organisation of any size or type
  follow the full submission process correctly


Funding opportunities

The Seafood Innovation Fund is accepting third call applications from 14:00 Wednesday 06 October 2021 until 12:00 noon Friday 07 January 2022. The call is open for feasibility studies only. The maximum funding available is £50,000 for projects with a duration of up to five months.

Successful third call feasibility studies will be eligible to apply for larger R&D funding following completion of their projects.

The first call for applications for feasibility studies and larger R&D projects opened in July 2019 and closed in early September 2019.

The second call for applications for feasibility studies and larger R&D projects opened in February 2020 and closed in late June 2020.

Expression of Interest

You can complete an Expression of Interest form and send it to the Seafood Innovation Fund if you want us to check if your initial project idea is eligible.

The Seafood Innovation Fund will assess your project and aim to provide feedback within 10 working days. A positive response to your Expression of Interest does not guarantee that you will be awarded funding. This will only be determined after your full project application has been through the full assessment process.

You do not have to fill in an Expression of Interest form and if you prefer you can make the full application for funding without initial advice.

How to apply

All applications must be submitted via the Bravo procurement portal.

You will need to register as either yourself or your organisation. After registering you can download all relevant documents and guidance to support your application.

Please make sure you read all the documents carefully as they provide essential guidance for your application.

Your application will not proceed to the next stage if it is:


  not completed correctly
  missing required documentation as stated in the guidance


If your application is declined

If your application to a Seafood Innovation Fund call is unsuccessful, you will receive notification via the Bravo procurement portal. You have 28 days after the date of the outcome letter to request a review of the decision stating why you think an appeal is justified. An appeal should only be requested if you think that the decision was based on a factual, legal or processing error. Your request for a review should be sent to Cefas at procure@cefas.co.uk. An independent appeal officer will review the decision and will notify you of the outcome of your appeal within 6 weeks of receiving it.

If successful, you will be sent notification of the award.

If your appeal is unsuccessful, the appeal decision is final, and no further correspondence will be entered into.

Depending on the reason for refusal, you may re-apply with a new application.





      
        
    Published 19 July 2019
    Last updated 13 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 September 2021
              Updated to include details of 2021 funding
            
            
              6 July 2020
              Funding opportunities information has been updated to say that opportunities are now closed.
            
            
              1 June 2020
              Added new section "If your application is declined" which is a new process that needs to be communicated.
            
            
              2 April 2020
              Updated for second call
            
            
              19 July 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        UK Seafood Fund: Fisheries Industry Science Partnerships scheme
        Fisheries and Seafood Scheme
        Maritime and Fisheries Fund (MFF): apply for funding
        Seafood Response Fund
        Exmouth Marina dredging and disposal at Lyme Bay 2 (formerly Sprey Point)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Marine
        Funding

  


  

  


    
  


    