
  
    
      Support with managing resources

    

      
        
  Information, tools, and guidance to help academies and trusts achieve the best value from their resources.

      
        
          

    The Department for Education is committed to working alongside schools and trusts to help them improve outcomes for pupils by getting the best value from all of their resources.

The school resource management collection contains useful tools and guidance for school leaders, school business professionals and governing bodies.
































































            

      
        
          
            Understanding your data
          
        
        

    Once you have submitted your first full year of financial data to ESFA, you can use the schools financial benchmarking service to compare your academy or academy trust’s income and expenditure with similar establishments in England.
The View My Financial Insights (VMFI) tool will help you to analyse your data and identify areas that may need further attention.
The understanding your data guidance sets out what is reasonable to expect to see from executive leaders and local governing boards when looking at the performance of a school or academy trust. The guidance can help you to collect and analyse data effectively and to identify what your data is telling you about your school’s performance.



      
        
          
            School resource management self-assessment
          
        
        

    The school resource management self-assessment tool helps to provide academies and trusts with assurance that they are meeting the basic standards necessary to achieve a good level of financial health and resource management. The tool can be used to identify potential areas for change to ensure that resources are being used most effectively. The tool is in two parts:

  a checklist, which covers questions on how resources are being managed
  a dashboard, which shows how a school's data compares to thresholds on a range of measures for good resource management and outcomes

You must complete the school resource management self-assessment tool and submit your completed checklist to ESFA in March 2022.
The top 10 planning checks for governors sets out a list of questions for school and academy governors to explore, to help schools manage resources and money effectively.



      
        
          
            Managing your workforce and recruitment costs
          
        
        

    We have produced guidance and tools to help schools manage their workforce. 
Integrated curriculum and financial planning (ICFP) is a management process that helps schools plan the best curriculum for their pupils with the funding they have available.
Working with school leaders, teachers and sector experts, DfE has developed:

  
workforce planning guidance to support schools and academy trusts to review staff workforce structures.
  a workload reduction toolkit to help schools leaders and teachers reduce workload.

The Teaching Vacancies Service is a free job-listing service from DfE. You can use Teaching Vacancies to post teaching and leadership jobs at your school or trust and to receive applications from candidates.
Academies can also use the agency supply framework, which is a list of DfE preferred supply teacher agencies.
We have published a guide to apprenticeships for the school workforce which explains how the apprenticeship levy applies to academy trusts and how academies can use apprenticeships.



      
        
          
            Better value procurement
          
        
        

    We have developed advice and tools which can help you achieve better value for money when procuring goods and services for your school.
The buying for schools guidance can help you plan what you need to buy and achieve good value. The Find a Framework tool provides details of suppliers, quality-checked by the framework providers.
The buying procedures and procurement law guidance can help ensure that you are complying with the relevant procurement regulations.
We are introducing a national Get Help Buying for Schools service which will offer advice and support with complex procurement, for example catering, cleaning, utilities, and technology services. There are currently two regional buying hubs, in the north-west and south-west, which offer these services to schools in their areas.
New academies are automatically opted into the risk protection arrangement (RPA) as part of the conversion process. The RPA is an alternative to commercial insurance and membership will automatically renew each year. Comprehensive guidance and full details of the RPA cover are published in the RPA membership rules.  RPA membership rules information. Free risk management advice, training and guidance is also provided to members.



      
        
          
            School Business Professionals
          
        
        

    School business professionals (SBPs) play a vital part in ensuring good resource management within schools. There is training and support available to help school business professionals continue their professional development and training. 
The School Business Professionals Networks guidance can help SBPs find, join, or create a local network. SBPs can also sign up to the monthly school business professional newsletter, which includes updates about school resource management initiatives that can support them in their role.
To receive updates about the latest school resource management initiatives SBPs can sign up to the monthly school business professional newsletter.



      
        
          
            School Resource Management Advisers (SRMAs)
          
        
        

    SRMAs are sector experts who work with schools and trusts, helping to make the best use of available resources, to deliver the best possible education for their pupils.
SRMAs can be particularly useful to trusts during the early stages of their development, by helping them consider the most efficient structures and methods of staff deployment and through the evaluation of all elements of a trust's assets, income and expenditure.
Academy trusts can access up to 5 days of SRMA support, funded by ESFA. The SRMA will conduct an integrated curriculum and financial planning (ICFP) review and produce a report that includes recommendations on steps a trust can take to make the best use of their resources.
If you would like to work with an SRMA please contact us.




        
  
