Our beloved Belfer Center colleague and friend passed away on February 1 following a brief illness.Pat had been part of the Belfer community since 2001 when she was hired by John Holdren, then the Science, Technology, and Public Policy Program (STPP) Director, as his Faculty Assistant. She continued to work with STPP and with John until her recent illness. When John Holdren relocated to Washington, D.C. in 2009 to serve as President Obama’s Science Advisor, Pat joined him for a year as his assistant in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. She was highly respected and well-liked in the White House just as she was here, John says, including by President Obama who especially appreciated her sense of humor.Pat was named a in 2008, a prestigious honor for “outstanding employees” at Harvard University. At the Belfer Center, she received the , for her “outstanding contributions to the Center and to the environment in which we work.” Around Harvard Kennedy School (HKS) and the Belfer Center, she was a delightful colleague much-loved by her fellow staff and others at HKS, by the faculty, and by the research fellows from around the world whom she welcomed, mentored, helped, and befriended.  Since news of Pat's loss became known, colleagues and friends from all corners of the Kennedy School and beyond have shared tears of sadness and stories of her special meaning to each of them. See below for some of those shared memories of Pat - whom we all miss greatly. Cards may be sent to The McLaughlin Family, 58 Parkway Crescent, Milton, MA 02186. The family has asked that in lieu of flowers, donations in Pat’s memory be made to the “We were heartbroken to learn of the passing of Pat McLaughlin. It’s hard to imagine the Belfer Center without Pat. As a faculty assistant and program manager, Pat personified steadfast support and keen judgment. The Belfer Center is known the world over for the quality of its science and technology research in no small part because of Pat’s outstanding organization and project management. And yet, today, what our colleagues are remembering most is not Pat’s performance but her humanity. Sharon Wilke shared this morning how Pat personally went to court in solidarity with an HKS cafeteria employee facing an immigration challenge. Pat understood that we aren’t just a team of professionals. We’re a family of people, with all the highs and lows that entails.  In lighter moments, Pat would laugh and celebrate with us. In times of challenge, she had our backs. She seemed to know just what to say at the right time. Many of us are reeling from this loss. Our thoughts and prayers are with Pat’s family.” “I met Patricia in November 2001, when she applied for the job as my Faculty Assistant.  If not love at first sight, it was certainly connection at first conversation. Patricia had run her own publishing company for many years and was tired of the pressures of meeting a payroll. With kids, grandkids, and friends in the Boston area—as well as a nice home and rewarding volunteer work at the Milton Animal League—she didn’t want to move away, and she was looking for a job here with a purpose she could relate to.  Whip smart, computer savvy, deeply knowledgeable about and committed to public issues and environmental causes, with a great sense of humor and superb people skills, she found the purposeful employment she was looking for at BCSIA and its Science, Technology, and Public Policy Program, which I chaired and she then administered; and I found the most capable, most unflappable, most collegial, most loyal assistant of my long career.  I will miss her terribly, as will all who knew and worked with her.”“Patricia had been a faculty assistant at the Kennedy School since 2001. She worked with John Holdren until 2009, serving for much of that period as program manager for the Science, Technology, and Public Policy Program at our Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. When John left the Kennedy School to become President Obama’s chief science adviser, she took leave from the School and moved to Washington for two years to work with John. In John’s words, ‘she was as loved and respected by White House officials as she was at the Kennedy School.’ Then Pat returned to the School and provided support in several areas of the Belfer Center until John found his way back to the School himself, at which point she began working with John again.
Patricia brought excellent judgment, outstanding organizational skills, a wonderful sense of humor, and high standards to all that she did. In John’s words again, she was a person of ‘surpassing competence, collegiality, and commitment.’ Patricia’s passing leaves a hole in our community.Our thoughts and prayers are with Patricia’s family and friends at this very sad time.” “Losing Patricia has left a huge, irreplaceable vacuum for me at Harvard. She was my first friend here, and amongst my closest too. There was never a time when I left a meeting with her without a smile on my face -- her warmth and kindness were pure sunshine to me. She cared about everything -- from making sure I had warm boots in the snow to having a solid support system in the office. Most of all, I knew she had my back in a foreign country. I miss her dearly, and I wish I could have said goodbye! I'm also hugely grateful for having had the opportunity to get to know her as well as I did. With loving memories.This photo was taken on the 30th of May 2019. It was commencement day, and my husband was graduating. I was all dressed up in a sari for the event. We were at the Forum downstairs with other families of graduating members, and I walked right past Pat without realising she was there. She, however, noticed me walking past and called out in her classic, witty style, ‘What? Are you too pretty to talk to me now?’ I apologized, gave her a hug and took this precious photo of us immediately after.”“Pat was one of the kindest people I knew at HKS. Her efficiency and professionalism were impressive, and I found her warmth and genuine care to be truly special. She always had time for a chat and was always generous with words of endearment and encouragement. I loved her great stories full of wit and wisdom that she would relate with shining, twinkling eyes.  Her generosity of heart and spirit were always uplifting on a cold or hectic day.  I will miss her loving presence dearly.” “Who do you turn to in a crisis? Last summer I got into a bike accident next to HKS. As HUPD loaded me into the car to take me to the hospital, I had one request: ‘Please tell Pat McLaughlin.’ She offered to sit with me in the emergency room, come to my house, pick up my kids, bring me food and medicine – whatever I needed. She checked in on me for weeks – long after I recovered. And she would have done the same for any one of us in her orbit.Harvard is an important institution, but for all its greatness it can feel cold and apathetic. Pat was the antidote to egotism. She could see right through bluster and insincerity and call it out, reminding you what’s really important – feeding your family, celebrating your friends, and reveling in the beauty of this world.” “Pat was a tremendous presence for both of us and for many other fellows at the STPP program. Pat always had a smile, a story, or a kind word to share. But Pat holds a particularly special place in our hearts as she felt delightfully responsible for being matchmaker to us two. Both of us will always remember her fondly and will be forever grateful to her for so many reasons.”         “I am truly sorry to hear of the loss of Pat. I am honored and blessed to have known Pat when i was a Research Fellow at ETIP starting from August 2008, when Pat helped me for a smooth transition.I will never forget her kindness. May God give her eternal rest and the family the strength to bear the great pain.” “Pat was a great friend, whom I shared with both professionally and personally.  We always knew if the other was out sick, on vacation, or going to be late for work. She always made you laugh and had plenty of stories to tell. She will be truly missed. ‘The Greatest Gift of Life is Friendship,’ and I have received it.”“Smiling eyes,
Mischievous smile,
Warm touch,
Touching concern....for John, for colleagues, for ‘her’ fellows. We honor her loyal service to John whom she so clearly admired, and ache for a desk-side chat, an elevator pitch, a pithy email, or a traffic-crossing report. Pat had certainly developed a unique brand of communication styles!I am grateful to Pat’s family for sharing her with us. It will not surprise them to learn that we, too, have grown under her watchful and caring gaze.”   Pat McLaughlin in her office with her daughter Rachel and Amanda Sardonis.“Despite what our age difference would suggest to the world, Pat was not only my mentor but also a great friend. The extra chair in her room represented a sacred place of reflection and rejuvenation for me. Whenever I would pass by her office and drop myself into her extra chair flustered, she’d tell me in her wonderful Bostonian accent ‘Simmer down!’ and would make sure we'd have a good laugh before I got up again. I will, as the rest of Belfer Center, miss her dearly... Thank you for all the laughs and the wisdom. Rest in Peace dear Pat.”"Pat has left an enormous hole at the Belfer Center and the Harvard Kennedy School.  I had the pleasure of knowing her and working with her, first as an MPP student, and then as a researcher and faculty member over the course of 8 years.  No matter what role I had, she was always ready to help, responded to emails within 5 minutes, and would always listen with a bright smile on her face and twinkling eyes.  And no matter how tight the schedule was, she was full of encouragement, warmth, and beyond dependable. She would do for me on a regular basis things I did not know even know I needed (and that, of course, ended up being indispensable).  She was the epitome of humanity and professionalism.  Even after leaving my full-time job at Belfer and the Kennedy School in 2016, we stayed in touch and she would be among the very first to write to congratulate me, encourage me, or help me.  I will always be grateful to Pat for being such a rock in good and bad times, and for helping make Belfer a home away from home. My heartfelt condolences to her wonderful family, whom she adored."“I worked closely with Pat during her two years at the White House.  We were both close to John Holdren and were frequent co-conspirators in protecting his time and interests.  I benefitted from Pat’s sharp wit and her insight and intelligence, all expressed with a classic Boston accent.  The entire staff loved Pat.” “The loss of Pat is a shock and very sad. Even though we didn’t work on the same areas, we shared in small moments that enliven one’s days – and that one takes for granted will go on indefinitely. To share a few: Pat and I would run into each other with frequency before work at Dunkin Donuts, and after we waited in line together, catching up, she would always try to outmaneuver me at the register in order to pay for my coffee. When I saw her in the halls, I was always greeted with ‘Hiya darlin’ and a broad smile. Having worked in publishing, she shared stories and encouragement with me whenever I would tell her the latest stressful developments on the book projects I was struggling with. On numerous occasions during Belfer events and gatherings, the wry looks she would subtly shoot in my direction when we made eye contact said all that needed to be said. In this sense, while Pat was of course an accomplished professional, she was also, to me, a little mischievous in how she reacted to the sometimes strange goings-on of Harvard University and its inhabitants. Just a few memories, the point of which is to say that Pat was a joyful and welcoming presence who will be sorely missed even by those like me, who only knew her for a relatively short period of time. I am touched by a colleague’s recollection of her coming to the aid of an HKS staffer facing an immigration challenge, but not surprised, since being supportive and inclusionary was seemingly an intractable part of who she was.”"Pat was the paragon of a friend and colleague. My day was always brighter after speaking with her and often sharing anecdotes about pets, especially her cat, Mr. Clancy.  I will miss the sparkle in her eye, her great sense of humor, love of adventure, and her excellent judge of character." “Pat was a very special person with a huge heart.   What I will remember most is her love of animals. Her dogs especially.  She told stories about her dogs. Her daughter’s animals.  The animals she met volunteering in Milton.  She loved to listen to stories about all our animals.  She remembered the names of all my dogs. After ‘Hi’ came ‘How’s Paco?’ or ‘How’s Sofi?’ or ‘How’s Rascal?’ She kept up with all of them and always knew the name of the current one. Pat had wise insight into animal behavior. When Gina Venturini went from owning dogs to owning cats Pat taught her the term ‘cattitude.’  That was what Gina needed to know. Dogs are one way and cats have attitude.  Pat had a twinkle in her eye, a very sweet smile, and a wonderful wonderful accent. My world was enriched by Pat.” "I am deeply saddened by the news of Pat's death. Pat played such of warm  and sweet part in my post doc fellowship(2008-2009)  at STPP of the Belfer Center. She  was always smiling , responsive and comforting whenever I had any questions or needed any help. She is always a shining figure standing alone with many other outstanding HKS people in the beautiful picture of my Harvard memory.As I am in Beijing China  and can not visit to the service, Please pass my deepest condolences to Pat's family and Professor John Holdren.May Pat rest in peace."“For several years, Pat’s office was just a few doors down from mine. That was a real treat because I got to see her several times a day as I walked past her bright, cheerful office and sometimes stopped by to chat a little – or sometimes more when we both had time. She was a fun, funny, warm, bright, insightful people person with a twinkle in her eyes and the most wonderful smile that made you smile with her.  She had a special ability to connect with people on a personal level; she listened, let you know she cared, and told you what she really thought in her straightforward way. I was always struck by her strong connections with our younger staff and fellows from around the world, who sought her advice and clearly valued their friendship with her. She always loved telling about her family and her granddaughters, whom she adored and who – I’m sure – adored her. And she talked about her cherished dogs and cats – those at home and those in the shelter where she loved to work on weekends. She was kind and special and so full of life. I miss her and her presence in my life.”“Pat was a special person to me and to so many at HKS. She was our band leader and our getaway driver. She always had a twinkle in her eye and cared about so many people. Pat will never be replaced; she will always be remembered. She would want us to laugh and share memories.”“Pat was a Kennedy School treasure and a friend to all who crossed her path. She graced us with her beautiful laugh and smile and always had time to chat when I tucked my head into her office over the years. She made the Belfer Center a better place by all she did and said. The loss is deep and hard to fathom for each of us. She will indeed be missed dearly and remembered with great, great fondness in all of our hearts.”“Pat and I came to HKS within months of one another and had offices quite close to each other.  We were also both from Milton and were part of the same parish and attended the same church.  But there the outward similarities ended.  She came from a large Irish Catholic family, I am an only child from a smaller Italian Catholic family.  But we shared a love of books, writing, of excellence in all things, our families, the beach, and so much more.  She was a mentor, as well as a surrogate sister and surrogate mother to me, after my mother passed away.  She also understood what it was to bring up children, as my mother did, without the presence of a husband/father.  I marveled at her energy, compassion, her humanity, her killer sense of humor, and her ability to keep things in perspective.  She certainly did not suffer fools gladly, but was also keenly aware of peoples’ frailties.  This was perhaps why she was so successful at the Kennedy School, and in the White House.  She realized that we are all human, and, as President Kennedy said, ‘our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish our children's future. And we are all mortal.’They say everyone is replaceable, but I believe it is profoundly untrue.  Pat is irreplaceable.  I feel as if my own mother has died all over again. My heart is broken.  But I take comfort in remembering Pat’s smile, her laughter, her beautiful voice, and her wisdom.  Rest in peace Pat, and I will see you at The Fruit Center.”
"From advice on dating to how to tee up the first meeting between siblings, Pat's wise words imparted courage and comfort.  She was there to celebrate my happiest of moments as well as give a boost during my toughest challenges.  When I introduced my then girlfriend now wife to her at a Belfer holiday party years back, Pat whispered in my ear with a big smile, "She's a keeper!"  As our family grew, it was a special joy to see the kids meet Pat.  I'm so grateful to have had a dear friend like her.  I see her smile whenever I pass along her sage advice to our family friends who are just about to bring a new baby home to meet a big sibling -- put a gift next to the baby for the big sib so that the first interaction is one filled with joy.  It worked like a charm for us."   “Over the course of fifteen years, when I talked to Pat on the phone I somehow knew she was always smiling.  When I talked to Pat on the phone I also knew she was always listening, carefully.  And when I talked to Pat on the phone I always knew she would get it exactly right, always. And when we occasionally fell a little short of the mark, and we did, she was always gracious and kind.... ‘don’t worry dear, we will fix it, John will never even know.’But what we will most remember about Pat was the person she was.  A very rare blend of exceptional  competence and even more defining - her wonderful generosity, kindness and compassion.  In an entire lifetime you come across a very small handful of people who are truly special. In my life, Pat will always be one of these people.   Our entire team and office staff is heartbroken at the news of Pat’s passing.   But as I have often said, it isn’t the length of a life that counts, it’s what you do with your life each and every day you wake up.   Each and every day Pat woke up she made us all better and made the world a much better place.  Godspeed Patricia, you will be greatly missed.”“Our volunteers are the heart and soul of the Milton Animal Shelter. We are a family. One of our family passed away after a short illness this weekend and we are devastated. Pat has been our Sunday morning cat caretaker extraordinaire for over 20 years. Pat’s love for the shelter animals is unsurpassed. When a stray cat would come in stressed, Pat would spend extra time sitting near the cat and telling it quietly it was now loved and safe. She always told me the cat was listening. Pat’s love and care also extended to our resident turtle Ruby and our current one legged hen Val. Pat would bring in organic lettuce and berries for their ‘Sunday brunch’ each week. Jack the cat got his much wanted lap time with Pat every Sunday and Tabitha received special treatment from Pat too. I never worried about the animals on Sunday mornings as I knew they were in the best of hands. Our hearts are broken and I hope Ginny, Honey, Koda, and Betsey greeted her in heaven. The Animal Shelter family is grieving. Pat you will be missed more than you could ever know.” (from Facebook)McLAUGHLIN, Patricia M. Of Milton, died Saturday, February 1, 2020. Born in Boston and raised in Milton, she is a graduate of Milton High School and The University of Massachusetts, Boston. From 2001 to the present, she worked at the Harvard Kennedy School. She began working for Dr. John Holdren as his assistant in the Belfer Center. In 2009, when Dr. Holdren was appointed White House Science Adviser to President Obama, she went with him and worked for one year in the White House.She received the Harvard Hero Award, an award recognizing outstanding employees at . She loved to travel and had many adventures. She loved all creatures, always had at least one dog and cat at home, and volunteered for many years at the Milton Animal Shelter, spending every Sunday morning visiting the cats and cleaning their cages.Above all, she loved her family: her children Tommy and Rachel, her daughter-in-law Lynne and her most beloved granddaughters Madeline and Emily, who affectionately referred to her as B Mamma. She cherished every moment with them and would take Mondays off in the summer so they could go on adventures together to the beach or a pool or just sit in her hammock and eat popsicles. Spending time with them was her greatest joy.In addition to her children and grandchildren, she is survived by her sisters, Ann, Elizabeth, Barbara, Mary and Sheilah and her brother Daniel, her sister-in-law Jeanne McLaughlin, and her brothers-in-law Jerry Aronson, Dan Tarpey and Chip Henry. She was predeceased by her sister Meghan. She also leaves behind many loving nephews and nieces, grandnephews and nieces, cousins, and her beloved Aunt Helen O'Meara.A Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated in Saint Agatha Church, Adams Street at Brook Road, Milton, Monday, February 10, at 10:30 AM. Relatives and friends invited. Visiting Hours at Dolan Funeral Home, 460 Granite Avenue, EAST MILTON SQUARE, Sunday, 2-6 PM. Interment Milton Cemetery. Donations in Pat's memory may be made to The Milton Animal League, 181 Governor Stoughton Lane, Milton, MA 02186. For information and directions,  (Published in Feb. 7, 2020)