
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Global Mobility Future Force Design 2040
  

  
  

  
    
  Understanding and exploring how mobility requirements are likely to change between now and 2040.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      13 October 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Global Mobility Future Force Design 2040
    
        PDF, 1.3MB, 79 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ddc-modinternet@mod.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Global mobility is described as the ability to deploy people and materiel to remote locations and then support and recover them from the theatre of operations.

Having the right force design and mix of military capabilities across all defence tasks will enable the UK Armed Forces to be in the right place at the right time.

The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) commissioned research to help develop a framework for identifying future global mobility requirements for the UK, out to 2040.

The study had 3 core research objectives:


  at a high level, the core military requirements for global mobility out to 2040 and any potential shortfalls regarding the current equipment plan
  a range of different options for delivery of global mobility out to 2040, including exploration of multinational cooperation models, potential business models for, and the influence of, emerging and new technologies on the delivery of global mobility
  at a high level, the implications of these options for future force design and capability planning, considering also how the potential capability gap can be bridged


The final report identified that UK Defence will continue to have to compete for finite resources with other government departments and in some ways will be required to ‘do more with less’ when delivering the country’s global ambitions. This is exemplified by the envisaged reduction of the number of strategic airlift platforms over the next two decades. As a result, Defence will need to think innovatively about how to design a model for delivering global mobility that is both effective and resilient.

A range of options should be considered which, in combination, could offer both effectiveness and resilience to the UK’s mobility fleet and underpinning systems. These options consider both the ‘supply’ side of mobility (i.e. the means of delivering mobility more effectively) and ways in which the ‘demand’ for mobility could be reduced and/or made more effective.

The study was undertaken by RAND Europe, which leads the Global Strategic Partnership (GSP) consortium providing strategic, policy and academic support to DCDC.

It will be of interest to strategy, policy and capability decision makers within UK Defence as well as wider stakeholders involved in delivering or using global mobility assets and systems now and in the future.

For an accessible version of the report, please contact DCDC: dcdc-doceds@mod.gov.uk.




        
      

      
    Published 13 October 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces

  


  

  


    
  


    