







The Use of Public Engagement for Technological Innovation
Literature Review and Case StudiesPublished in: gov.uk website (2021) Posted on RAND.org on January 29, 2021
by Camilla d'Angelo, Advait Deshpande, Emily Ryen Gloinson, Joe Francombe, Cagla Stevenson, Mann Virdee, Salil Gunashekar
Related Topics: Emerging Technologies, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy, United Kingdom
View related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at www.gov.ukThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








With the promise to improve lives, and the offer of abundant opportunities, technological innovation is regarded as a crucial enabler for the advancement of societies and economies at large. Technologies and their applications, however, also present an array of social, economic and regulatory challenges. How to harness the benefits of technological innovation while addressing the risks associated with these developments is the subject of much discussion by governments, regulators, industry, academia and the general public. A key aspect associated with these discussions and debates is public engagement, which is increasingly being recognised by stakeholders as a critical instrument to encourage transparency and openness, increase representativeness, and build trust in decision making and the technologies themselves.
Public engagement is a broad term that is used in a variety of sectors (e.g. in research, healthcare and policymaking). It encompasses diverse ways in which members of the general public can be brought together to engage with issues that are of public importance. In the context of technological innovation, public engagement is used to describe the involvement of a diverse group of people (the general public, but also other key groups such as lobbyists, civil society organisations and social influencers) in discussions and debates about potential applications of new and emerging technologies, their governance, regulation and the wider issues that could arise from the way that they are developed and adopted.

Access further information on this document at www.gov.ukThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


 Related Products 








Project
The use of public engagement for technological innovation

Jan 29, 2021






Research conducted by

RAND Europe



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Crown copyrightPublisher: Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 218
Document Number: EP-68481
Year: 2021
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Emerging TechnologiesScience, Technology, and Innovation PolicyUnited Kingdom

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




