The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) has honored John P. Holdren with its prestigious Arthur M. Bueche Award for his “extraordinary impact on the engineering profession” and for his “contributions to technology research, policy, and national and international cooperation.” The presentation was made during the NAE’s annual meeting Oct. 3 in Washington, D.C., where it also presented its Simon Ramo Founders Award to William A. Wulf, University of Virginia Professor Emeritus.  The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) on Sunday presented its prestigious Arthur M. Bueche Award to John P. Holdren for his “extraordinary impact on the engineering profession” and for his “contributions to technology research, policy, and national and international cooperation.” The presentation was made during the NAE’s annual meeting Oct. 3 in Washington, D.C., where it also presented its Simon Ramo Founders Award to William A. Wulf, University of Virginia Professor Emeritus.  Holdren, Research Professor at Harvard Kennedy School and Co-Director of the Science, Technology, and Public Policy Program (STPP) at the Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, served as Science Adviser to President Barack Obama from 2009-2017. “The National Academy of Engineering has made the perfect choice in selecting John Holdren for the Bueche Award,” said Belfer Center Director Ash Carter. “John has dedicated his life not only to the advancement of scientific and technological research, but also to applying that knowledge through policy solutions to critical global challenges in and out of government. He epitomizes what the Belfer Center is about."“My pleasure at receiving this award,” Holdren said, “is amplified by my having known and learned from so many of the 37 previous recipients, including three Harvard Kennedy School colleagues: Lew Branscomb, Bob Frosch, and Venky Narayanamurti. My feeling of connectedness with the previous Bueche awardees adds to the pride I feel upon joining this extremely distinguished company.”   In his acceptance remarks during the presentation ceremony, Holdren noted the importance of partnerships not only across disciplines, government, academia, and business, but also among countries. “Notwithstanding all the factors that understandably divide countries across the world—and, today, particularly divide the United States and China and the United States and Russia—there are science-and-engineering-heavy issues where bilateral and multilateral collaboration is so much in our national interest, as well as in the national interest of our partners, that we should strive to maintain such collaboration despite nearly all other differences,” Holdren said. “In my view, the issues where international collaboration is essential include climate change, pandemic disease, threats to the ocean and the Arctic, nuclear-reactor safety, some aspects of space exploration, and minimizing the risks from nuclear weapons and nuclear-explosive materials."  Acknowledging his many mentors over the years, Holdren said, “Each new opportunity led to other opportunities and new mentors, with the surprising result that I was actually able to get away with my wildly ambitious aspiration to have a career working on some of the world’s most interesting problems in collaboration with some of the world’s most interesting people.” He added that he is currently working on a book about what he’s learned in his five-decade long career, with points he hopes will be helpful now and in the future.  See the NAE award press release .  ###Contact: Sharon Wilke, Assoc. Director of Communications, 