







The Business Case For Rigorous Evaluation Of Mobile Health Apps
Published in: Health Affairs (2021). doi: 10.1377/hblog20210826.547352 Posted on RAND.org on September 01, 2021
by Claire E. O'Hanlon, Shira H. Fischer, Erika Litvin Bloom
Related Topics: Health Behaviors, Health Information Technology, Health Interventions

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at www.healthaffairs.orgThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








The mobile health app industry (also known as mHealth) is booming. App developers are hoping to engage users in health behavior change, including weight loss and smoking cessation, and are also targeting mental health concerns such as anxiety. Although many of these apps claim to be science-based, rigorous data on their efficacy or outcomes are scant. Researchers have developed numerous frameworks, tools, and criteria for evaluating them, and consumer-based evaluations such as app store star ratings are misleading at best. Without rigorous evaluation, it will be impossible to distinguish apps with the potential to transform human health from those that more closely resemble 21st-century snake oil.

Access further information on this document at www.healthaffairs.orgThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

RAND Health Care



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Project HOPE: The People-to-People Health Foundation, IncPublisher: Health Affairs
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 1
Document Number: EP-68713
Year: 2021
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Health BehaviorsHealth Information TechnologyHealth Interventions

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




