
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Government science and engineering: career framework
  

  
  

  
    
  The skills you need to be a scientist or engineer in government.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Science & Engineering Profession and Government Office for Science

      
      Published
      4 May 2020
      Last updated
      
        30 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    GSE career framework (version 2)
    
        PDF, 1.59 MB, 57 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email contact@go-science.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This framework outlines the skills, knowledge and experience required to be an effective scientist or engineer in government. It presents 4 job families that describe the different government science and engineering (GSE) roles across government with suggested development pathways. It’s in line with Civil service success profiles.

Using the GSE career framework

We have developed use cases from different departments and organisations as examples of how you can use the GSE career framework when discussing your development with your manager. We have captured a range of career stages and types of roles, and you can use the framework even whilst on loan or secondment.

Have a read through the different examples and use the template to kick-start your own personal development plan.


Find out more about the Government Science and Engineering profession.





        
      

      
    Published 4 May 2020
    Last updated 30 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 November 2021
              Published version 2 of the framework.
            
            
              4 May 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Child Abduction - Thailand
        Health and Care Bill: combined impact assessments
        BEIS: workforce management information

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    