
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Manage your data for access and reuse
  

  
  
  
      
  How to make sure your data is accessible, reusable and maintained independently of any technology or service.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      27 November 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Record how your data contributes to your estate

        
        
          Record what data you’re sharing

        
        
          Provide access to your database in a standard format

        
        
          Use open data standards in your data management

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
You should manage your data as an asset that is independent of any technology or service. This will involve using data standards to help you store your data so other government organisations can find and reuse it.

You will need to manage your data differently if it relates to personal or sensitive information. You must carefully consider data security and data protection issues. Read the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) for:


  data security - ‘Make things secure’
  data privacy - ‘Make privacy integral’
  data lifecycle - ‘Make better use of data’


Record how your data contributes to your estate
Your organisation will have an Information Asset Register holding details of all your information assets. You should make sure you store details of your data in the register and review these records as your data sets and systems evolve.

Read the ICO guidance for more information on how you should manage your Information Asset Registers. You should speak to your organisation’s Chief Data Officer if you cannot find your Information Asset Register owner.

Adding your data record will make sure it is discoverable and accessible within your organisation, and to other relevant parts of government. The data record will also give your organisation an overview of its data estate so it is clear where you have duplicated or siloed data.

You should follow the metadata standards when recording your data in the Information Asset Register. This record could contain:


  licences that might govern your data reuse or access
  contact details for your data asset
  reference data you might have sourced from elsewhere
  information about your database or data file
  the contract governing how your service data is collected, maintained or shared
  APIs giving access to your database or underlying data repository


Record what data you’re sharing
To understand which data sets in your organisation are the most useful and valuable, you should keep a record of what data is shared externally.

You can also use your organisation’s Information Asset Register, or internal Data Sharing Catalogue, to store the record of what data you share externally. Speak to your Chief Data Officer to find out whether your organisation is following a central or federated approach to managing these records.

This record will also help your organisation realise its data maturity, and help with data reuse. For example, your record might include:


  what data you’ve shared and why you’re sharing it
  the data sharing agreement that governs the sharing - these tend to govern higher value data sets
  how others access the data - if you are providing access to data through an API, this should be added to the government API catalogue

  which data standards the data sets use, for example the date standard ISO8601 or the metadata standards schema.org - this will only be useful if you can keep the record up to date


Provide access to your database in a standard format
Your technology or service team will often need to present data to users in the right structure for them to easily use, such as through an application or web page. You will also have an underlying database that contains the raw data your application or web page uses.

Make sure your organisation can directly access data from this underlying database in a format that meets government technology and data standards. This access will help your organisation reuse data in new services, and analyse it more easily. It will also help reduce duplication of your data source.

One way your organisation can provide this access to the database easily is by using a modular approach to your architecture.

When you’re buying or changing databases, you should talk to your technical leadership forum or design authority to make sure you are not duplicating data across your organisation.

Use open data standards in your data management

When managing your data, you should use data standards recommended by the Open Standards Board. The Data Standards Authority also endorses them.

This will help you record data in a consistent way to other government teams, and make sure you can share your data easily and securely.

You can read the open standards for government data and technology collection page to see standards recommended for use across government.

You can also use the GitHub repository of the Data Standards Authority and the GitHub repository of the Open Standards Board to see potential future data standards recommendations.




      
        
    Published 27 November 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Metadata standards for sharing and publishing data
        Develop your data and APIs using a reference architecture
        Recommended open standards for government
        Make better use of data
        Make privacy integral

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    