

Workplace Technology
Photo by Shutter2U/Getty Images
Helping firms manage worker-technology collaborationThe interactions between human workers and computers is a new and complex managerial frontier. Our work seeks to develop new decisionmaking tools and information to help managers develop techniques and strategies for more successful human-machine interactions, and to anticipate the impacts of new technologies on workers and the workplace.Featured Insights

/content/rand/education-and-labor/centers/middle-class-pathways/workplace-technology/jcr:content/par/wrapperdiv_1003919526/teaserlist



CommentaryShould the Federal Workforce Stay Remote? Planning for After the CrisisAs physical distancing becomes the new norm, so too does telework. But should federal agencies maintain their remote operations for the long haul? As those of us involved with national security agencies, operations, and workforce issues know, this is not a decision to make lightly.


CommentaryWhat Autonomous Vehicles Could Mean for American WorkersAutonomous vehicles are projected to hit American roads within the next few years. They promise safer transportation, greater mobility for millions of Americans, and other benefits. But they will also have enormous impacts on the workforce.


Related Publications



Advanced Robotics 
Katherine Stewart, Advait Deshpande, Stijn Hoorens, Salil GunashekarThe potential socioeconomic implications and applicability of game-changing technologies to the European services sector, covering: advanced robotics; autonomous transport devices; blockchain; virtual and augmented reality; and wearable devices.



Autonomous Transport Devices 
Becky Ioppolo, Advait Deshpande, Stijn Hoorens, Salil GunashekarThe potential socioeconomic implications and applicability of game-changing technologies to the European services sector, covering: advanced robotics; autonomous transport devices; blockchain; virtual and augmented reality; and wearable devices.



Oversight of emerging science and technology 
Salil Gunashekar, Sarah Parks, Joe Francombe, Camilla d'Angelo, Gemma-Claire Ali, Pamina Smith, Daniela Rodriguez-Rincon, Marlene Altenhofer, Gordon R. McInroyTo help inform decisions about emerging science and technology oversight in the future, RAND Europe studied ten examples of oversight spanning different countries, time periods, and science and technology areas, and identified eight key lessons.



Additive Manufacturing in 2040 
Trevor Johnston, Troy D. Smith, J. Luke IrwinThis Perspective -- part of a series examining critical security challenges in 2040 -- offers a new framework for exploring the disruptive dimensions of additive manufacturing technology and explores which sectors and industries might be most affected.



Autonomous Vehicle Technology 
James M. Anderson, Nidhi Kalra, Karlyn D. Stanley, Paul Sorensen, Constantine Samaras, Tobi A. OluwatolaAutonomous vehicle technology has the potential to significantly improve social welfare. This report addresses the numerous legislative, regulatory, and liability issues this technology will raise.



How Can the United States Prepare a Workforce for Advanced Manufacturing Using Robotics? 
Megan Andrew, Timothy Marler, Jesse Lastunen, Hannah Acheson-Field, Steven W. PopperAs industrial robots become more advanced, there likely will be a shortage of technicians with the skills to work with, program, and repair them. This brief presents findings of RAND researchers' analysis of the state of training for these workers.


Related Projects



Transforming How We Understand Autonomous Vehicle Safety
This project is a collaboration with RAND web designers, and video and media specialists, to transform the existing AV safety toolkit into an interactive, web-based product that is accessible beyond technical audiences, and can be utilized by state and local policymakers, as well as technology developers and the broader public, to generate and explore different scenarios for AV adoption, safety performance, and outcomes over time.




Emerging Technology and Therapeutics Report on Artificial Intelligence
The project will provide an evidence map and narrative review. It will feature interviews on artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning applications for risk or outcome prediction in health care delivery.





