
        
        
        
     while most government organizations have started projects or programs to improve their technology, few have had  transformation. Public-sector organizations are often saddled with mistrust from their business partners, difficulty accessing top talent, and complicated legacy ecosystems that prevent them from quickly making transformative changes. The federal government alone invests more than $85 billion in technology programs each year, yet success has proven difficult (more than 60 percent of programs in yellow or red status), and the government is only falling further behind its private-sector peers.



	
Public-sector chief information officers (CIOs) have played different roles in tech transformation, from enablers to thought leaders to program leaders.  is an opportunity for CIOs to take the reins and drive a more transformative overhaul of their public-sector organizations’ technology. New leaders will be looking for innovative ways to modernize, and technology is likely to be at the forefront of their minds after the last several years of innovation, accelerated even further by the COVID-19 crisis. The incoming administration’s signal that it will invest heavily in IT modernization is further evidence of the opportunity ahead.



    
    
However, the window for change is usually quite small, and the momentum behind this transition more fleeting than generally required to plan a technology transformation. That makes it important to learn from past transitions and plan for the technology imperatives for modernization.  In this article, we outline three vectors of technology modernization and provide advice on how to use a transition to accelerate this modernization successfully. Major technology themes to help set the agendaWe are increasingly seeing that the most successful and innovative organizations focus on ten technology “plays” within. From these, transitioning CIOs can choose the ones that are most relevant and important for their organizations:
     Effective technology functions maintain close ties with other business functions, but top CIOs take that a step further, with technology  the business. That requires reimagining technology’s role in support of the business mission through technology-led strategy (play #1), a product- and platform-centered operating model (play #2), and technology functions becoming the steward of fully digitized customer and user journeys (play #3). 
     Modern technology functions set up their delivery models to keep pace with the fast-evolving needs of customers and employees. , technology teams prioritize activities that have the greatest potential to help their organizations realize sought-after performance gains (play #4). , accelerate delivery and stabilize the technology environment by automating development, testing, and deployment processes (play #5). To improve the quality and efficiency of their work, modern technology functions hire highly skilled technologists to deliver mission-critical work in-house (play #6). They also  (purposefully ranging from niche engineering organizations to large-scale systems integrators to hyperscalers to software-as-a-service [SaaS] firms) for help with closing gaps in in-house capabilities, using contracts that reward vendors for producing business outcomes rather than merely augmenting in-house capacity (play #7). 
    Renewing core systems so that they support new digital functionalities and frequent upgrades can provide significant performance benefits. Such modern systems are arranged according to a flexible architecture consisting of self-contained applications connected with  (application programming interface) (play #8). A modern technology core includes  that provide technology teams across the enterprise with the high-quality information and powerful tools they need to gain insights into customer and employee preferences, design innovative applications, and enrich user experiences (play #9). It also enables technology teams to  and privacy protections as they develop solutions, rather than adding them after solutions development is complete. This approach greatly accelerates delivery while maintaining, or even improving, information security (play #10). 
While these vectors and plays have proven transformational for many high-performing technology functions, CIOs have taken different approaches to sequencing the change. Most successful approaches fall into one of two archetypes. One way is to transform the full technology function by driving two to three plays enterprise-wide each year. This approach prioritizes bringing the full organization along in the journey but may delay value realization until a critical mass of plays has been executed. Another approach is the digital-factory model, which comprises a ring-fenced and mostly greenfield team that employs all (or most) of these plays simultaneously on a subset of the CIO’s overall portfolio. The factory gradually takes on more demand, and legacy approaches slowly get absorbed. Overall tips for your CIO transitionCIOs have a notoriously challenging role. They must balance high aspirations with realistic planning, must keep up with fast-moving technology disruptions, and are expected to become domain experts in their organizations’ business—all while getting constant pressure from executive leaders who struggle to understand technology and while providing high-quality employee experience at ever-lower costs. Below, we share three tips for success from CIOs who have experience with transitioning into the role:
    

    
    
    
During the transition, the CIO’s challenge is how to best sequence a subset of the ten plays to fit the organization’s needs and mission. It requires balancing ambition with pragmatic pace and showing quick value while having a long-term view. Done well, CIOs can engender transformative benefits for agencies and citizens alike.