
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Rosalind Franklin Laboratory
  

  
  
  
      
  The Rosalind Franklin Laboratory is part of the Lighthouse laboratory network and is at the heart of UKHSA’s plans for managing COVID-19. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Health Security Agency

      
      Published
      8 December 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Safety and accuracy

        
        
          Diagnostic capabilities for critical illness

        
        
          Local benefits

        
        
          How to find us

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Rosalind Franklin Laboratory is publicly owned and began processing PCR tests in June 2021.

The laboratory’s official name honours Rosalind Franklin, an eminent scientist whose work was pivotal to confirming our understanding of the structure of DNA.

The addition of the Rosalind Franklin Laboratory to our network means that we have 10 Lighthouse laboratories stood up in collaboration with the NHS, academia, not-for-profit organisations and industry.

Located in Royal Leamington Spa, the 220,000 square-foot site is the largest of its kind in the UK, and one of the largest in Europe. The laboratory will deliver high-volume, high-sensitivity coronavirus (COVID-19) diagnostic tests.

The facility is part of the Lighthouse laboratory network, with the ability to process a higher number of tests per day at a lower cost per test. The shared expertise from the Lighthouse network has been invaluable to shaping the workflow and technology deployed at the site.

Safety and accuracy

All laboratories within the national network are validated through a rigorous COVID-19 test programme quality assurance and validation process.

We have a number of measures in place to maintain safety and accuracy at laboratories. This includes a full rigorous end-to-end validation of assay, equipment and competency-based assessments of personnel. There are strict protocols in place to protect staff, including medical grade PPE, which is worn at all times. All staff have the appropriate skills and receive any necessary training.

Diagnostic capabilities for critical illness

The laboratory will in the immediate term be dedicated to COVID-19 testing. In due course, the laboratory is also intended to use some of its capacity for variants of concern (VOCs) testing.

This is not just about providing the UK with the ability to combat today’s pandemic; it represents an investment in our scientific capabilities for the future. The development of the laboratory will help establish a flexible pandemic response infrastructure that can respond to surges in demand.

Testing capacity

When scaled up to full capacity, the laboratory will be able to process hundreds of thousands of tests a day. It will play an important role in stopping the transmission of COVID-19, as well as ensuring the nation can respond quickly and at greater scale to deal with pandemics and other future threats.

The state-of-the-art facility will also boost the UK’s already substantial contribution to the global fight against VOCs of COVID-19 by delivering genomic sequencing capabilities back-to-back with traditional PCR testing.

From having the capacity to test 2,000 people a day in March 2020, we have built the largest network of diagnostic testing facilities in British history. The laboratory started processing live samples on 25 June 2021 and reached the major milestone of a million tests in October 2021. It will operate 24/7 to process the public’s COVID-19 tests at unprecedented capacity and speed on behalf of the UK.

The UK already conducts a significant proportion of all the world’s genomic sequencing. Once genomic sequencing is up and running at the Rosalind Franklin Laboratory alongside the processing of PCR tests and genotyping assays, the laboratory will act as a 24/7 high-throughput sequencing hub for the UK.

Local benefits

The site has considerable benefits to the local area in terms of job creation and putting Royal Leamington Spa on the international scientific map with world-leading technology. Students attending local universities will benefit through formal placements and training opportunities, enhancing the area’s scientific skills base.

The laboratory will be a major driver of prosperity in the Midlands through the creation of over a thousand jobs. The approach to recruitment has focused on hiring from the local area, with around 60% of staff hired so far coming from within 30 miles of the site. 

The laboratory also aims to create and upskill scientists of all experience levels, building the next generation of scientists. Half of the staff hired to date are into entry-level roles, which are expected to increase to up to two-thirds of roles as the laboratory scales up its capacity. 

Long-term prospects for school leavers

Our laboratory support technician role does not require a scientific degree or background, and with in-house training would offer possibilities for promotion. We intend to introduce a formal apprenticeship scheme once we have enough staff in place to ensure that there would be mentoring and buddying support for apprentices, to make the experience valuable for them.

As part of our plans for local engagement, we look forward to planning a series of outreach activities and visits to the lab for schools and colleges, in line with our ambition for the lab to promote and inspire STEM careers.

Sustainable transport measures

We are committed to implementing a travel plan with sustainable transport measures to and from the site. These measures have been developed in discussion with the local district and county councils and include the following.


  Actively encouraging staff to use local public transport (for example train and buses), walk or use the cycle route between the car park and laboratory. This includes the provision of cycle racks onsite.
  Laboratory staff and contractors who drive to work are provided with free parking and shuttle bus facilities.
  As part of their induction process, all laboratory staff are provided with full details of the shuttle bus, in addition to regular reminders in staff communications.
  We regularly remind staff and contractors of travel options available and request they are considerate and respectful of our neighbours.
  We will have electric vehicle (EV) charging at the laboratory. The car park will have EV charging infrastructure installed with an option to scale this capability up as required, as demand for charging grows.


How to find us


Please note that evidence of a negative COVID-19 test within 72 hours of arrival is required for entry to the laboratory.


Car parking

All parking must be booked in advance with the organiser of your visit.

Parking is usually allocated at our offsite park and ride at the Old Ford Foundry, behind Pets at Home:



  Unit 2B
  Myton Crofts
  Leamington Spa 
  CV31 3NY
  


Getting to the Park and Ride

From M40 J13


  Leave the M40 at Junction 13 (signed Leamington, Warwick and A452).
  Join the A452 (Banbury Road) following signs for Leamington and Warwick.
  Take the third exit at the Greys Mallory roundabout onto the A452 - Europa Way (signed Leamington Spa and Ind Estates).
  Continue straight over the Heathcote roundabout, remaining on the A452 - Europa Way.
  Take the first exit at the Europa Way roundabout remaining on the A452  - Europa Way.
  Pass over the Grand Union Canal.
  At the next roundabout, take the second exit onto A452 - Princes Drive, following signs for Kenilworth, Town Centre, A452 and Warwickshire College.
  Pass Pets at Home on the left and turn left into the Park and Ride (look for a large Kier™ logo by the entrance).


From M40 J14


  Leave the M40 at Junction 14 (signed Leamington A452) and continue onto the Warwick Bypass.
  At the Greys Mallory roundabout, take the second exit onto the A452 - Europa Way (signed Leamington Spa and Ind Estates).
  Continue straight over the Heathcote roundabout, remaining on the A452 - Europa Way.
  Take the first exit at the Europa Way roundabout remaining on the A452 - Europa Way.
  Pass over the Grand Union Canal.
  At the next roundabout, take the second exit onto A452 - Princes Drive, following signs for Kenilworth, Town Centre, A452 and Warwickshire College.
  Pass Pets at Home on the left and turn left into the Park and Ride (look for a large Kier™ logo by the entrance).


Sat nav: 52°16’25.6”N 1°32’21.5”W 
what3words map

By train

Leamington Spa is the nearest station. Taxis are available at the station.

By bus

Buses 77, 77A, 502, 665, U1, U1A and X77 stop on Tachbrook Road.

Download a map of the Rosalind Franklin Laboratory (PDF, 403 KB, 1 page)

Contact us


    Rosalind Franklin Laboratory

    
      Precision Park, Juno DriveRoyal Leamington SpaCV31 3RG
    

    
        
          Email LSPA_enquiries@dhsc.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone: 01926 507 600
        
    








      
        
    Published 8 December 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Laboratories and reference facilities

  


  

  


    
  


    