
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Child sexual abuse: Child House
  

  
  

  
    
  Information for local partnerships on the Child House model of support for children and young people affected by sexual abuse.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      6 September 2021
      Last updated
      
        13 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Child House: local partnerships guidance (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Child House: local partnerships guidance
    
        PDF, 7.25MB, 36 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
A Child House is a multiagency service model supporting children, young people and non-abusing parents and carers following child sexual abuse. It is a child-centred approach in which the organisations involved in supporting the child (for example, health, social care, police, charities) provide co-ordinated services in a single, child-friendly environment.

The Home Office, NHS England (London), the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC), and the Department for Education have provided funding to the Lighthouse - a national proof of concept pilot of the Child House model in north-central London.

As part of the cross-government Tackling Child Sexual Abuse Strategy the government committed to publish guidance for local areas seeking to adopt similar Child House models, building on the learning from the Lighthouse and international best practice. The guidance is a collection of cross-cutting principles and activities, core functions and multi-agency arrangements that enable child-friendly, effective, and co-ordinated interventions for children and young people following sexual abuse.

MOPAC has also published a toolkit which includes detailed practical advice and recommendations, based on the experience from the Lighthouse pilot. We recommend that local areas consider both the local partnerships guidance and the toolkit if adopting a Child House approach to supporting children and young people affected by sexual abuse.



        
      

      
    Published 6 September 2021
    Last updated 13 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 September 2021
              Added link to toolkit published by the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC).
            
            
              6 September 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime prevention

  


  

  


    
  


    