
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Defence and security: exporting guide
  

  
  
  
      
  Get help to sell your products and services overseas. Guidance for UK companies involved in the defence and security sector.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Defence and Security Exports

      
      Published
      13 November 2014
      Last updated
      
        4 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          UK DSE event and exhibition support

        
        
          UK DSE Export Support Team (EST)

        
        
          Media support

        
        
          Cyber security

        
        
          Wider DIT services

        
        
          Export opportunities

        
        
          Finance

        
        
          Trade associations and regional trade groups

        
        
          Restrictions and regulations

        
        
          Business risk

        
        
          Selling to UK Armed Forces and working with the MoD

        
        
          Contact UK DSE

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The guide will help you prepare your company for exporting. It will help you decide whether you have:


  compliant, competitive and exportable products or services
  the financial and human resources necessary to start exporting


Department for International Trade UK Defence and Security Exports (UK DSE) cannot make any commercial decisions for you, but can guide you.

UK DSE event and exhibition support

UK DSE provides UK companies with support at defence and security events and exhibitions, such as:


  exhibition support
  meet the buyer opportunities
  Defence and Security Industry Days (DSID)



See UK DSE events and exhibitions programme.


UK DSE Export Support Team (EST)

The EST is a specialised unit of serving military personnel who have a wide variety of knowledge and operational experience that can provide expert support to the UK defence and security industry.

Free services

Services include:


  
    company visits such as on-site visits or invitations to EST headquarters in Larkhill to discuss how UK DSE and the EST can support you in export opportunities and campaigns
  
  
    impartial military advice during a company visit when the team can offer advice on products and capabilities to enhance and exploit opportunities in overseas defence and security markets
  


Chargeable services

Services include:


  
    professional support to maximise the impact of your promotional material including video and photo shoots to make it look as professional and eye-catching as possible
  
  
    demonstrations and presentations to delegates, overseas visitors or foreign military personnel on your behalf, including use of the EST bespoke hangar that can be set up as an exhibition area
  
  
    support at exhibitions both in the UK or abroad, providing you with the opportunity to display your products on the UK DSE stand or having someone available with a stand at your own location
  
  
    after sales training supporting your after sales training offer which can include assistance in producing training packages and delivering training
  
  
    the opportunity to host foreign delegations who are seeking possible defence and security solutions from UK industry
  



For more information on EST services and related costs, call 01980 845361 or email TRADE-EST-IHUBMAILBOX@mod.gov.uk.


Media support

UK DSE has a dedicated senior press officer who acts as a spokesperson for the defence and security sectors. They are available to offer media advice and support for:


  launch of equipment
  engaging international, national and specialist media at UK and overseas exhibitions
  support for overseas campaigns


Support and engagement can be offered onsite or remotely, depending upon availability and circumstances. They can be contacted on 020 7215 8467.

Cyber security

UK DSE helps cyber security companies do more business internationally.

See our cyber security export strategy.

Wider DIT services

Department for International Trade (DIT) staff provide expert trade advice and practical support to UK-based companies who want to grow their business overseas, through a range of services.

Export opportunities


Department for International Trade (DIT) provides free international export sales leads from its worldwide network. Search for export opportunities.


Overseas government defence procurement websites are also a good source of new opportunities:


  Australian Government tenders
  Canadian Government tenders
  Czech Republic White Paper
  
European Defence Agency (EDA) is a listing of European contract opportunities
  
TED (Tenders Electronic Daily) the Official Journal, tendering opportunities provided by Europa.eu

  
Ge-biz – Singaporean government tenders, you will have to register to join
  Indian Ministry of Defence
  Indian Ministry of Defence Research & Development Organisation
  Republic of Ireland Tenders
  NATO Support Agency
  The Netherlands MOD Contracts
  New Zealand Government Tenders
  United Nations Procurement Division
  USA Contract opportunities
  USA Department of Defense



For more information about selling to NATO see Navigating NATO Procurement.


Finance
You may need some form of credit guarantee or insurance to protect you against non-payment or other financial issues in certain markets.

UK Export Finance (UKEF) can provide extra capital to finance large projects and help grow businesses. Watch our videos on the help UKEF can give on trade finance and managing payment risk.


See how UKEF helped BCB supply body armour to the Ecuadorian Navy.


To find out what government-backed finance advice and support is available to you and your business, see finance and support for your business.

Trade associations and regional trade groups

Providing help and information in your specific business area:


  
ADS representing UK aerospace, defence and security
  
BSIA - British Security Industry Association
  
BSIF - British Safety Industry Federation
  Society of Maritime Industries
  
FIA - Fire Industry Association
  
TechUK - representing IT and software businesses
  NDI UK
  
WEAF West of England Aerospace Forum
  
NWAA - Northwest Aerospace Alliance
  
MAA - Midlands Aerospace Alliance
  
FAC Farnborough Aerospace Consortium
  Aerospace Wales


Other trade associations can be found on the Trade Association Forum.

Please note that UK DSE cannot recommend or endorse membership of any particular organisation. There may be a membership fee or other associated costs when engaging them.

Restrictions and regulations

You need to know if you need a licence to export your goods or services, and if you are able to promote them overseas (MOD form 680).

Find out what restrictions and regulations apply to export defence and security goods and services.

Business risk

The following guides will help you identify potential risks:


  crime and fraud prevention for businesses in international trade
  protect your intellectual property
  Overseas Business Risk
  
Anti-bribery video and guide by the City of London Police, Overseas Anti Corruption Unit


Selling to UK Armed Forces and working with the MoD

If you are looking to sell your goods and services to the UK Armed Forces, you will find further help and guidance at Selling to UK MOD.

For advice about developing your new ideas, technologies and capabilities for the UK defence market see the Defence and Security Accelerator.

Contact UK DSE


UK DSE has a dedicated SME Support Team to help and advise UK SMEs.

If you are contacting us for the first time fill in our short contact form.

UK SMEs that have already engaged with UK DSE should email ukdse.smeenquiry@trade.gov.uk.



For general enquiries contact ditdso.enquiry@trade.gov.uk  or if you are looking for a specific contact see the UK DSE directory.






      
        
    Published 13 November 2014
    Last updated 4 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              4 March 2021
              Updated DIT DSO references to UK DSE, and removed market research section.
            
            
              5 May 2020
              Amended 'Contact DIT DSO' section adding in form link for first time UK SME enquiries.
            
            
              26 July 2016
              Added link to Navigating NATO Procurement
            
            
              7 July 2016
              Added section on UKTI DSO Export Suport Team.
            
            
              26 May 2016
              Added section on media support
            
            
              3 May 2016
              Added link to cyber security page
            
            
              11 March 2016
              Updated page - added link to the British Safety Industry Federation
            
            
              6 October 2015
              Added link to UKEF case study
            
            
              1 July 2015
              Added link to UKTI DSO case studies.
            
            
              13 November 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Exporting

  


  

  


    
  


    