
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Field Epidemiology Training Programme (FETP)
  

  
  
  
      
  An overview of the programme including selection criteria and application process for staff who are, or will be, working in applied field epidemiology.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      26 January 2015
      Last updated
      
        9 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Specialty Registrar training placement

        
        
          What to expect from the FETP


        
        
          Areas of work covered by the programme

        
        
          Core competencies

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The 2 year programme is aimed at medical, nursing, scientific, or veterinary staff who are, or whose future career may be, in a post involving field investigation and epidemiology and who want to further enhance their specialist skills. The programme provides training and experience to develop the competencies agreed for field epidemiologists in the UK and across Europe.

Specialty Registrar training placement

The FETP placement may offer registrars currently on a Public Health Training Programme the opportunity to acquire specific additional or contextual experience which may not be available in some programmes.  However, registrars must discuss the application with their TPD to gain approval for taking time out of training for the FETP.

What to expect from the FETP


Training is provided on the job, but at least 10% of time is dedicated to formal training courses based in the UK or Europe. Fellows will be based in one of the FETP training sites within England, Northern Ireland or Wales for the 2 year fellowship. The locations include national centres, field epidemiology and health protection teams. The courses are taught in a sequential order throughout. Fellows are expected to complete the training consecutively.

Areas of work covered by the programme

As a workplace-based learning programme, it enables individuals to learn what they need to do in their jobs. The  FETP is about learning through service, underpinned by theoretical understanding of concepts taught during didactic training modules. The 5 areas are:


  investigation of an acute outbreak or incident
  applied epidemiological study
  surveillance
  communication
  teaching and training


Field Epidemiology Training Programme prospectus (PDF, 3.06MB, 20 pages)

Core competencies

The training programme provides training and experience which have been agreed as the core competencies by the UK and Europe.

The programme covers:


  public health
    
      public health science
      public health policy
    
  
  applied epidemiology
    
      risk assessment
      public health surveillance
      outbreak investigation
      epidemiological studies
      infectious diseases
      laboratory issues
      public health guidance
    
  
  biostatistics
    
      probability
      inferential statistics
      sampling
    
  
  applied informatics
    
      internet
      statistical and other data analysis
    
  
  communication
    
      editing and presentations
      risk communication
      written communication
      oral communication
      use of new technologies
    
  
  management
    
      planning and use of resources
      team building and negotiation
    
  
  capacity development
    
      mentorship
      training
    
  
  ethics
    
      protection of individuals
      confidentiality
      conflicts of interests
    
  


How to apply

Criteria for entry

The call for applications for the FETP fellowship takes place annually (usually in March) on Health Jobs UK.

Applicants must have:


  a completed Master’s degree or PhD in epidemiology or public health or related scientific discipline
  experience of working within public health, health protection or applied epidemiology for at least 18 months by the date of application.  Time spent in education including PhD studies does not qualify
  be able to demonstrate how the FETP will be of benefit to their future career


Specific eligibility criteria for Specialty Registrars

Registrars currently on a Public Health Training Programme must discuss the application with their Training Programme Director (TPD) to gain approval for taking time out of training for the FETP. They will also need to agree with their TPD, if applicable, an application for prospective approval of a proportion of the out of programme time to count towards training and their Certificate of Completion of Training (CCT).
Full details of the training programme together with essential selection criteria will be advertised on Health Jobs UK.

Contact us

If you have a question about the fellowship contact the FETP programme office on fetp@phe.gov.uk.





      
        
    Published 26 January 2015
    Last updated 9 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 March 2021
              Added Field Epidemiology Training Programme prospectus 2021. References to ECDC removed.
            
            
              23 March 2020
              Added new version of training programme prospectus.

Removed essential entry criteria document as it contained outdated information.
            
            
              22 March 2019
              Updated 'Field epidemiology training prospectus'.
            
            
              12 March 2018
              Added new version of Field Epidemiology Training Programme prospectus
            
            
              26 January 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Health and social care training

  


  

  


    
  


    