
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Improved grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out about the standard for improved grassland, what land is eligible and how much you can get paid.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      7 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        7 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How the standard works

        
        
          How much you’ll be paid

        
        
          What land is eligible

        
        
          Introductory level: actions

        
        
          Intermediate level: actions

        
        
          Advanced level: actions

        
        
          Further advice and information

        
        
          Funding for capital items

        
        
          Monitoring and support

        
        
          Additional standards you can apply to this land

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This information is for farmers piloting the Sustainable Farming Incentive.

How the standard works

There are 3 levels to the standard. Each level has a set of actions you must complete, where relevant, to get paid.

The levels build on one another - each one includes the actions from the previous levels.


If you’re already doing activities on your land that fulfil the actions in this standard, you can use these areas instead of creating new ones. This means you can maintain existing areas to complete actions that require you to ‘create’ or ‘establish’ something.


Anything you’re doing to complete an action only counts towards that action. It will not count towards the standard’s other actions, unless this guidance says otherwise.

When to complete actions

Because agreements will start from November 2021 at the earliest, it will be too late to complete some actions that must take place after harvest - for example, establishing a green cover by the end of September or mid-October.

Complete these actions within 12 months of your agreement start date. This means you can complete the post-harvest actions after harvest 2022.

Actions that need you to create a new habitat may not be practical during the winter months - for example, sowing a winter bird food mix. You should complete these actions within 12 months of your agreement start date.

How much you’ll be paid

The levels and payments for the improved grassland standard are set out in the table.

These payment rates are annual.


  
    
      Level
      Payment per hectare
    
  
  
    
      Introductory
      £27
    
    
      Intermediate
      £62
    
    
      Advanced
      £97
    
  


You’ll be paid for all the eligible land that’s in your agreement and you’ll have to complete the actions on all that land.

Some actions affect a smaller percentage of this land – for example, allowing tall vegetation and scrub to develop on 2% of grassland. You’re still paid for all the eligible land in your agreement, not just the 2%.

You can also apply for funding for capital items.

What land is eligible

All grassland that meets the definition of improved grassland is eligible for this standard, including:


  improved grassland on mixed farms
  temporary grassland - land that’s been in grass or other herbaceous forage for five years or less


To qualify as improved grassland, the sward composition should include at least 2 of the following:


  more than 30% cover of rye-grasses and white clover
  up to 8 species per m2, including grasses
  less than 10% cover of wildflowers and sedges, excluding white clover, creeping buttercup, docks, thistles and ragwort


Management of the land is likely to include:


  regular re-seeding, or within the last 15 years
  regular fertilising with typically at least 100kg per hectare of nitrogen as compound fertiliser or animal manures and slurries
  boom spraying herbicide to treat weeds
  active, well-maintained field drains
  taking any conserved forage as silage at least once a year


Grassland defined as improved grassland encompasses a wide range of farm and land types, including organic systems.

Grassland which is defined as improved grassland could be eligible for the low and no input grassland standard if you can follow the actions of that standard and it meets these criteria:


  helps to sustainably manage or buffer sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) and priority habitat
  protects historical or archaeological features
  targets ground-nesting wading birds, when in-field scrub is less than 1%
  is on parcels next to a permanent water course


Read how to assess the number of plant species per square metre of land.

Ineligible land

The following land is ineligible for this standard:


  sites of special scientific interest (SSSI)
  areas of peat soils greater than 20% soil organic matter to a depth of 40cm or more


Changes to the land because you’re completing actions

The land must be eligible at the start date of your agreement.

Changes to the land’s use, composition or cover that happen because you’re completing the actions in this standard do not affect eligibility, and you’ll continue to be paid under this standard, at your chosen ambition level.

Measuring areas for actions where there are hedgerows or water bodies

Some actions must be fulfilled on a percentage of the eligible land entered into the standard. For example, having a mix of herbs, legumes and grass on 5% of eligible land.

If you’ve entered the same land into the hedgerows standard or water body buffering standard, the percentage area for an action to be fulfilled under another standard cannot overlap with the hedgerow or water body buffer strips. Measure the percentage area from the edge of these buffer strips. If this is not the case, measure from the edge of the hedgerow or water body.


The area can include the 2-metre or 1-metre cross-compliance buffers required under GAEC 1, and the 2-metre green cover requirement under GAEC 7a, where relevant.


Introductory level: actions

You must do the following actions to be paid £27 per hectare.

Read the section of this guide about evidence you should keep.

1. Manage fields for grazing

This action will increase biodiversity and help reduce run-off.

Do one of the following:


  graze to keep an average sward height of at least 5cm, over at least 75% of the area of grazed pasture during the growing season
  graze rotationally, with rest periods


Information on managing fields for grazing

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  manage grazing on improved grassland
  use rotational grazing on permanent grassland


2. Manage historic features in grassland

This action will protect visible features of historic interest.

In areas with visible features of historic interest, for example ridge and furrow, barrows or deserted villages you must:


  maintain permanent grassland
  only re-seed by direct drilling or over-sowing


Information on managing historic features in grassland

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to manage historic features in grassland.

3. Leave margins uncut to encourage flowers and seed

This action will increase habitat and food for mammals and insects.

Where you have hay and silage fields, leave at least 33% of margins uncut to produce flowers and seed. Aim to distribute the uncut margins around cutting fields (minimum width 2 metres), rather than locating them all in one area.

Information on leaving margins uncut

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  make field-dried hay or haylage
  use controlled cutting of grasslands to promote wildlife


4. Create buffers around in-field trees

Where you have in-field trees:


  maintain a buffer to at least 2 metres beyond the edge of the canopy to protect the roots
  leave mature ivy and low-hanging and fallen, dead or dying branches on the tree or beneath the canopy to provide habitats for wildlife
  do not use the buffer area for the supplementary feeding of livestock


You do not need to exclude livestock from the buffer area.

You’ll be paid £3 per tree.

You cannot claim the in-field trees buffer payment if the land is conditionally exempt from Inheritance Tax (Heritage Property Relief).

Information on creating buffers around in-field trees

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  maintain in-field trees
  maintain dead wood to benefit wildlife


5. Use a nutrient management plan

Follow a nutrient management plan to:


  make sure manures and fertilisers you apply meet crop and soil requirements
  minimise losses of nutrients to the environment


Required documents

You must keep your nutrient management plan for us to monitor. You do not need to send this to us unless we ask for it.

Information on nutrient management plans

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to create and use a nutrient management plan.

6. Allow tall vegetation and scrub to develop on 2% of grassland

This action will provide habitats for wildlife.

Take or keep field corners and small areas up to 0.5 hectares out of grazing and cutting management to allow tall vegetation and scrub to develop.

This should cover a minimum of 2% of grassland area.

Information on allowing tall vegetation and scrub to develop

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  create and maintain field corners
  create scrub and scrub mosaics
  manage scrub and scrub mosaics


Intermediate level: actions

At the intermediate level you must do the actions in the introductory level, plus the following actions to be paid £62 per hectare.

1. Allow tall vegetation and scrub to develop on 5% of grassland

This action will provide more habitats for wildlife.

Take or keep field corners and small areas up to 0.5 hectares out of grazing and cutting management to allow tall vegetation and scrub to develop.

This should cover a minimum of 5% of grassland area - this includes the 2% from the introductory level.

Information on allowing tall vegetation and scrub to develop

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  create and maintain field corners
  create scrub and scrub mosaics
  manage scrub and scrub mosaics


2. Control cutting on silage fields

This action will increase biodiversity and improve habitats for breeding birds.

Where you have silage fields, on at least 60% of them do one of the following:


  delay the first cut until the last week of May
  leave a period of 8 weeks between the first and second cuts


3. Manage ditches

This action will increase available habitats for farm and aquatic wildlife.

Where you have ditches:


  manage your ditches between 1 September and 1 April to minimise disturbance to wildlife
  cut no more than half the length of bank vegetation in any year
  carry out in-channel management on a rotation of at least 3 years


You can do in-channel management more regularly if you’ve been told to by a flood management authority. This requirement only applies where the applicant has control over the management of the ditch. Ditches managed by the Environment Agency or an Internal Drainage Board are exempt.

Information on managing ditches

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to create and manage ditches for wildlife.

4. Test your manures and soils

To inform your nutrient planning:


  test the nutrient content of slurry and manure
  test soils every 3 years or on 30% of land each year


Required documents

You must keep your records of soil, slurry and manure testing for us to monitor. You do not need to send these to us unless we ask for them.

Information on testing your manures and soils

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to create and use a nutrient management plan.

5. Complete a whole farm nutrient budget

This action will improve your nutrient use efficiency and reduce nutrient losses to the environment.

Complete a whole farm nutrient budget that takes account of inputs from feed, fertiliser and manures outputs in crop and livestock products.

Use your budget to produce an action plan.

Required documents

You must keep your nutrient budget documents for us to monitor. You do not need to send these to us unless we ask for them.

Information on whole farm nutrient budgets

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to use a whole farm nutrient budget.

6. Limit inputs of liquid manures

This action will limit the loss of nutrients to water bodies and reduce the impact of slurry application on soil biology.

Limit inputs of slurry or other liquid manures to 30 cubic metres per hectare in a single application.

Do not increase your application rate if your current rate is less than this.

Supporting evidence

You may want to keep supporting evidence for this action. This is in case actions you have undertaken and aims or outcomes achieved are not clear from remote monitoring or at site visits.

7. Use low emission technologies

This action will reduce emissions of ammonia.

Apply organic manures (slurry, other liquid manures) using low emission technologies (trailing hose and shoe or shallow injection) to grassland.

Information on low emission technologies

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to use precision application of fertiliser, manure and other inputs.

8. Introduce clover and other legumes on 15% of improved grassland

Introduce or keep clover or other legumes on at least 15% of improved grassland to:


  improve soil structure, soil carbon and soil biology
  provide habitat for pollinators
  reduce fertiliser application


Information on introducing clover and other legumes

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to grow legumes in grassland to replace nutrient inputs.

Advanced level: actions

For the advanced level you must do the actions in the introductory and intermediate levels, plus the following actions to be paid £97 per hectare.

1. Introduce diverse grass, herb and legumes on 20% of improved grassland

This action extends the intermediate action to a larger percentage of your land.

Introduce or keep more diverse grass, herb and legume swards on 20% of improved grassland to:


  improve soil structure, soil carbon and soil biology
  provide habitat for pollinators
  reduce fertiliser application


Information on introducing diverse grass, herb and legumes

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  grow legumes in grassland to replace nutrient inputs
  create and maintain herbal leys


2. Manage grazing on improved grassland

This action will increase biodiversity of your grassland, increase habitats available for wildlife, and reduce run-off.

Allow wild or sown flowers to flower and produce seed by:


  managing grazing to produce a tussocky sward of at least 8cm average height over at least 75% of the area of grazed pasture, during the growing season
  delaying cutting until the majority of flowers have reached seeding, in fields cut for forage


Information on managing grazing on improved grassland

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  manage grazing on improved grassland
  make field-dried hay or haylage
  use controlled cutting of grasslands to promote wildlife


3. Allow ryegrass to bear seed

This action will increase food available for birds in winter.

Allow at least 2% of ryegrass swards (in addition to ungrazed areas) to bear seed through the winter. 
Where possible, locate them near hedges and semi-natural habitat.

Information on ryegrass

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to provide ryegrass seed-set for birds over winter.

4. Reduce nutrient inputs

This action will reduce nutrient run-off, leaching, emissions of ammonia and greenhouse gases.

Reduce nutrient inputs to a maximum of 100kg per hectare total nitrogen from manures, or 50kg per hectare total nitrogen from inorganic fertilizer over at least 5% of the improved grassland area.

This applies particularly:


  in fields that slope to a watercourse and are next to sensitive habitats
  where inputs are typically above these levels


Information on reducing nutrient inputs

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to:


  use less fertiliser, manure and lime
  reduce grassland management intensity next to watercourses
  complete a runoff and soil erosion risk assessment


5. Do soil mapping

This action will help you to:


  better target nutrient application
  use nutrients more efficiently
  minimise nutrient losses


Do detailed soil mapping to test nutrient variations within fields, for example P, K, Mg and pH, on either:


  20% of the farmed area each year
  the entire farmed area once every 4 years


Required documents

You must keep your soil mapping documents for us to monitor. You do not need to send these to us unless we ask for them.

Information on soil mapping

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to create and use a nutrient management plan.

6. Use efficient precision application equipment

Use eﬃcient precision application equipment for fertilisers and organic manures.

Information on using precision application equipment

How you complete this action is up to you, but you can read information on how to use precision application of fertiliser, manure and other inputs.

Further advice and information

For further advice on doing the actions in this standard read the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot: summary of advice.

Read more about how this standard will meet the environmental outcomes and benefits of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot.

Funding for capital items

As a Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot participant you’ll be able to apply for funding for the following capital items:


  fencing
  sheep netting
  permanent electric fencing
  rabbit fencing supplement
  fencing supplement – difficult sites
  wooden field gate
  small wildlife box
  medium wildlife box
  large wildlife box


You’ll apply for these through the Countryside Stewardship Capital Grants scheme from early 2022. If you’re successful you’ll be offered a separate Countryside Stewardship Capital Grants agreement. To be eligible for this funding you must not start capital items work (or order materials) until your Countryside Stewardship Capital Grants agreement starts.

You may also be able to get funding from other programmes for precision fertilizer application equipment.

More information will be published before applications open.

Monitoring and support

The Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot will use a new model for monitoring agreements. It will focus on outcomes and improvement instead of penalties.

Once your agreement has started, we’ll use various techniques to see whether you’re achieving the aims of the standards.

Read more about:


  how the pilot will monitor agreements
  the aims of the standard


Additional standards you can apply to this land

Land parcels you use for this standard can also be used for the:


  improved grassland soils standard
  hedgerows standard
  water body buffering standard


If you apply more than one standard to the same land, the actions for each must be delivered separately.

Further information

See all the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance.




      
        
    Published 7 June 2021
    Last updated 7 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 October 2021
              Clarified information on waterbody and hedgerow area measurements.
Added information about evidence requirements.
            
            
              5 October 2021
              Updated information on funding for capital items.
            
            
              1 October 2021
              This adds guidance on measuring areas close to hedgerows and water bodies.
            
            
              10 September 2021
              Amended date for publication of 'capital items' guidance.
            
            
              9 September 2021
              Changed agreement start date from October 2021 to November 2021 at the earliest.
            
            
              1 September 2021
              This update clarifies some issues around feeding livestock and in-field tree buffers.
It adds a section on delaying actions that may be impractical to undertake immediately.
            
            
              23 August 2021
              This update clarifies how payments work, following user feedback. It explains that when an action covers only a percentage of eligible land in an agreement, you still receive payment for all eligible land in the agreement, not just that percentage.
It explains that changes to the land because you're fulfilling your agreement do not affect eligibility
It also adds a line explaining that anything you're doing to complete an action only counts towards that action and not the others in the standard. 
It also clarifies how areas of land already meeting the standard can be included.
            
            
              6 August 2021
              Clarified page title and introduction to make it clear that this standard relates to the pilot scheme, not the full scheme launching in 2022.
Amended wording of links to supporting technical guidance to make it clearer that this is optional information, that can help meet the standard, but is not mandatory.
Added water body buffering standard to the list of other standards that can also be applied to improved grassland.
            
            
              5 August 2021
              Added a link to the collection of SFI guidance.
            
            
              23 July 2021
              Added detail that payments for buffers around trees or related capital items are not claimable if you are conditionally exempt from Inheritance Tax.
            
            
              22 July 2021
              This change corrects a payment rate. The rate per hectare for the advanced level is £97. This was given correctly in the table of payments, but incorrectly under the advanced actions.
            
            
              18 June 2021
              A line saying 'You should keep evidence to show you’ve done these actions for inspections' has been removed from each level of actions. This did not give enough useful information and the evidence requirements are clearer in the linked monitoring guidance. Best practice examples will follow in an update to the SFI guidance.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Improved grassland soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance
        Low and no input grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Hedgerows standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Water body buffering standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Arable and horticultural land standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Arable and horticultural soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Farm woodland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Hedgerows standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot
        Improved grassland soils standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot

      
        
          + 5 more
        
      

      
        
          Low and no input grassland standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Water body buffering standard of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, Aims of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot standards, and Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot: summary of advice
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Rural grants and payments

  


  

  


    
  


    