
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: Allocation Framework
  

  
  

  
    
  The Allocation Framework sets out the rules for Contracts for Difference Allocation Round 4 and the eligibility requirements applicants must satisfy.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      13 September 2021
      Last updated
      
        25 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: Allocation Framework (November 2021)
    
        PDF, 584 KB, 89 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DRAFT: Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: Allocation Framework (September 2021)
    
        PDF, 515 KB, 87 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Western Isles schematic diagram template
    
        PDF, 103 KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Shetland Isles schematic diagram template
    
        PDF, 113 KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Orkney schematic diagram template
    
        PDF, 106 KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Allocation Framework for CfD Allocation Round 4 (AR4) sets out:


  the rules for Allocation Round 4
  the eligibility requirements that applicants must satisfy


Remote Island Wind (RIW): schematic diagrams

You can use these diagrams as part of your application if you are applying:


  for Remote Island Wind (RIW) CfD units connecting to the national transmission system
  to a distribution system in the local government areas of Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, Orkney Islands Council and Shetland Islands Council


Applicants can annotate the relevant diagram and submit to the Delivery Body to demonstrate that the project meets the condition in Regulation 27A(3)(d) of the Contracts for Difference (Allocation) Regulations 2014 (as amended), as set out in Schedule 5 of the Allocation Framework.

The eligibility requirements for RIW are geographically neutral and applications from any geographical location within scope will be considered.


For the purposes of Allocation Round 4, any references to soft constraints will not be relevant and will not apply for this round.


Differences from third Allocation Round

The most significant differences from the third Allocation Round are:


  simplified operation of delivery years in auctions in Rules 9, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 23
  amended valuation formula and operation of target dates in Rules 11, 12, 20 and Schedule 2
  amended rules for maxima in Rules 17, 18, and 19
  a new technology type, Floating Offshore Wind
  extension of the delay period before the allocation process must be re-run in Rule 21
  flexibility to apply ‘soft’ capacity caps, maxima and minima in Rules 9, 14, 16, 17, 18 and 19 (not being used in AR4)
  amendment of rules when a bid causes an auction constraint to be equalled – though this will make no difference to the operation of auctions in AR4 as this is designed to address issues that might arise when soft constraints are applied





        
      

      
    Published 13 September 2021
    Last updated 25 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              25 November 2021
              Final version of Allocation Framework for CfD AR 4 added.
            
            
              13 September 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: standard terms and conditions
        Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: statutory notices
        Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: Draft budget notice
        Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: Administrative strike prices methodology
        Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: Exemptions Request Notice

  




      

    Collection

  


        Contracts for Difference (CfD): Allocation Round 4

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon technologies

  


  

  


    
  


    