





Read Online

A Need for Speed?
Identifying the Effects of Space Acquisition Timelines on Space Deterrence and Conflict Outcomes
by Benjamin Goirigolzarri
Related Topics: Military Acquisition and Procurement, Space Science and Technology, Space Warfare, Wargaming
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


1.5 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Department of Defense leadership have asserted that slow space acquisition timelines may threaten American space superiority, but the link between acquisition timelines and space conflict has not been rigorously investigated in prior research. This dissertation questions that assertion through a mixed-methods approach of game-theoretic modeling and case study analysis. I found primarily that acquisition timelines drive underlying strategies, but not necessarily the outcomes of space conflict and deterrence. If an actor is at a disadvantage, they can mitigate that disadvantage by investing in relatively simple redundancies and resiliencies supporting their space architecture and remain reserved through conflict. In the case of parity, I find the appropriate strategy is to invest in complex systems and to take an assertive posture in conflict. Given leadership's statements and this dissertations' conclusions on American space acquisition timelines, the United States should focus its investments on relatively simple investments that support its resilience in space. This does not, however, suggest that the United States should abandon its space acquisition reform efforts, as those may improve broader conflict dynamics and space acquisition efficiencies.

Research conducted by

Pardee RAND Graduate School



This document was submitted as a dissertation in September 2019 in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the doctoral degree in public policy analysis at the Pardee RAND Graduate School. The faculty committee that supervised and approved the dissertation consisted of William Shelton (Chair), Bonnie Triezenberg, and Jonathan Wong.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Dissertation series. Pardee RAND dissertations are produced by graduate fellows of the Pardee RAND Graduate School, the world's leading producer of Ph.D.'s in policy analysis. The dissertations are supervised, reviewed, and approved by a Pardee RAND faculty committee overseeing each dissertation.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: AuthorPublisher: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 103
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RGSD432
Document Number: RGSD-432
Year: 2019
Series: Dissertations



Explore
Related Topics

Military Acquisition and ProcurementSpace Science and TechnologySpace WarfareWargaming

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Goirigolzarri, Benjamin, A Need for Speed? Identifying the Effects of Space Acquisition Timelines on Space Deterrence and Conflict Outcomes. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2019. https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD432.html.
Goirigolzarri, Benjamin, A Need for Speed? Identifying the Effects of Space Acquisition Timelines on Space Deterrence and Conflict Outcomes, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RGSD-432, 2019. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD432.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



