





Read Online

Limb Salvage and Recovery After Blast-Related Injury
Proceedings and Expert Findings from a U.S. Department of Defense International State-of-the-Science Meeting
by Tepring Piquado, Emily Hoch, Charles C. Engel
Related Topics: Combat Medicine, Epidemiology, Health Care Technology, Trauma, Veterans Health Care
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


1.8 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










During the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, there have been changes in the mechanism, severity, and complexity of injuries from improvised explosive devices — changes that have resulted in a higher incidence of combat-related traumatic injuries. Battlefield medical advances and improvements in protective equipment have resulted in a greater proportion of blast-exposed service members surviving their severe injuries, and progress in surgical reconstruction and rehabilitation has resulted in an increased medical capacity to salvage limbs despite the severe injuries. Collectively, these developments have led to important questions about when to emphasize limb salvage over other treatment options, most notably amputation, for individuals with severe blast-related limb injuries.
To address these questions, the Eighth Department of Defense State-of-the-Science Meeting (SoSM) on Blast Injury Research was held in March 2019 at the RAND Corporation's office in Arlington, Virginia. The topic of the meeting was "Limb Salvage and Recovery After Blast-Related Injury." Participants and presenters included scientists, clinicians, and policymakers from DoD, including the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force; the Marine Corps; the National Institutes of Health; and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; as well as representatives from academia, industry, and a number of different countries. These conference proceedings summarize the presentations and the findings, conclusions, and recommendations that have emerged from SoSM expert-led working groups.

 Related Products 









Report
Limb Salvage and Recovery After Severe Blast Injury

Jul 6, 2020
Charles C. Engel @CharlesEngel, Molly M. Simmons, et al.










Report
The Effect of Blast-Related Burn Injuries from Prolonged Field Care to Rehabilitation and Resilience

Sep 21, 2020
Charles C. Engel @CharlesEngel, Ryan K. McBain, et al.







Table of Contents

Chapter One
State-of-the-Science Meeting Summary

Chapter Two
Literature Review Summary

Chapter Three
Keynote Address

Chapter Four
Invited Speaker Presentation Summaries

Chapter Five
Scientific Presentation Summaries

Chapter Six
Accepted Poster Abstracts

Appendix A
Previous State-of-the-Science Meetings

Appendix B
Agenda of the Eighth Department of Defense International State-of-the-Science Meeting on Blast Injury Research

Appendix C
Keynote Speaker Biography

Appendix D
Biographies of Invited Speakers

Appendix E
Expert Panel Biographies

Appendix F
Planning Committee

Appendix G
Meeting Participants




Research conducted by

RAND National Security Research Division



This research was sponsored by U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Command and conducted within the Forces and Resources Policy Center of the RAND National Defense Research Institute, a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Staff, the Unified Combatant Commands, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the defense agencies, and the defense intelligence enterprise.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Conference proceeding series. RAND conference proceedings present a collection of papers delivered at a conference or a summary of the conference.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 76
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/CF420
Document Number: CF-420-OSD
Year: 2020
Series: Conference Proceedings



Explore
Related Topics

Combat MedicineEpidemiologyHealth Care TechnologyTraumaVeterans Health Care

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Piquado, Tepring, Emily Hoch, and Charles C. Engel, Limb Salvage and Recovery After Blast-Related Injury: Proceedings and Expert Findings from a U.S. Department of Defense International State-of-the-Science Meeting. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CF420.html.
Piquado, Tepring, Emily Hoch, and Charles C. Engel, Limb Salvage and Recovery After Blast-Related Injury: Proceedings and Expert Findings from a U.S. Department of Defense International State-of-the-Science Meeting, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, CF-420-OSD, 2020. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/conf_proceedings/CF420.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



