
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Custody and resettlement
  

  
  

  
    
  How to plan for the custody and resettlement of children. Guidance for youth justice practitioners.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Youth Justice Board for England and Wales

      
      Published
      1 May 2019
      Last updated
      
        29 June 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Custody and resettlement: section 7 case management guidance
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Pathways to Resettlement
    
        PDF, 162KB, 6 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email web.comments@justice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Young person's resettlement journey
    
        PDF, 188KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email web.comments@justice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

The YJB is aware that elements of this guidance are now out of date.

It it is being updated with support from the Youth Custody Service, but if you have any specific queries then please email either Henry Smithers Henry.Smithers1@YJB.gov.uk or Jerry Kirk jerry.kirk@yjb.gov.uk at the YJB.


This guidance offers detailed information for youth justice practitioners.

For more information, read:

How to use out-of-court disposals: section 1 case management guidance

How to work in court: section 2 case management guidance

How to manage bail and remands: section 3 case management guidance

How to assess children in the youth justice system: section 4 case management guidance

How to use reports: section 5 case management guidance

How to use community interventions: section 6 case management guidance

Custody and resettlement: section 7 case management guidance

Ways to improve quality: section 8 case management guidance

How to support parents of children in the youth justice system: section 9 case management guidance



        
      

      
    Published 1 May 2019
    Last updated 29 June 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 June 2020
              Updated contact details for recall teams in 'Custody and resettlement: section 7 case management guidance'
            
            
              1 May 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        How to use out-of-court disposals
        How to use community interventions
        Ways to improve quality
        How to manage bail and remand
        How to use reports

  




      

    Collection

  


        Case management guidance

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law

  


  

  


    
  


    