
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Use controlled traffic farming
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out how land managers can reduce soil compaction, improve soil health and reduce runoff by using controlled traffic farming.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      7 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        14 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Why to use controlled traffic farming

        
        
          Where to use controlled traffic farming

        
        
          Before you start using controlled traffic farming

        
        
          How to use controlled traffic farming

        
        
          How to tell if controlled traffic farming is working

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

If you’re completing this action as part of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, how you do it is up to you.

The advice on this page can help you get better environmental and business benefits, but you do not have to follow it to get paid.


Why to use controlled traffic farming

Driving on fields with farm machinery compacts soil and damages the soil structure. Controlled traffic farming reduces soil compaction by limiting all farm machinery to fixed tramlines.

Even machinery with low pressure tyres can damage soil.

You’ll drive on 25% to 40% of the field during farming operations in one season using controlled traffic farming. This is compared to 85% in a conventionally ploughed field.

The benefits of controlled traffic farming

Controlled traffic farming can lead to increased yields of:


  more than 30% in forage grass
  more than 25% in forage maize
  more than 20% in potatoes
  12% to 15% in combinable crops


Controlled traffic farming reduces soil compaction and improves soil structure. Good soil structure:


  improves nutrient uptake by crops, which improves growth at lower nutrient levels
  allows more water to infiltrate the soil, so more water is available to crops and the risk of flooding is lower
  reduces erosion and runoff of pesticides, fertile topsoil, and nutrients like phosphate


Controlled traffic farming reduces the need for deep cultivations, which:


  improves soil biology, as deep cultivations damage soil fauna, like worms
  lowers labour and fuel costs


Environmental benefits of controlled traffic farming include: 


  more carbon captured and stored by the soil as organic matter
  lower greenhouse gas emissions from machinery and less nitrous oxide lost from the soil


Where to use controlled traffic farming

You can use controlled traffic farming on any arable, grassland, mixed or horticultural farm. It works well with no-till or min-till farming.

You’ll get the most benefit on soils that are prone to compaction. These are usually the heavier clay, clay loam and silty clay loam soils.

Before you start using controlled traffic farming

Use a runoff and soil erosion risk assessment to identify fields with poor soil structure or soil prone to compaction.

You must follow the farming rules for water. These require you to take steps to stop manure, fertiliser or soil getting into water bodies.

How to use controlled traffic farming

Controlled traffic farming needs careful planning and investment in precision farming machinery and technology.

How you design a system depends on your machinery and farm business. To set up a controlled traffic farming system:


  Measure the track widths and operating widths of your existing machinery.
  Select a suitable permanent tramline spacing that all machinery will use.
  Map permanently fixed tramlines for each field based on this fixed spacing.
  Install GPS with real-time kinematic (RTK) positioning in each vehicle to make sure all vehicles drive on the exact same areas.
  Train field operators and contractors to use controlled traffic farming equipment and maps.
  Drive on the same permanently fixed tramlines for all operations in every season.


You’ll likely base tramline spacing on the most expensive machine or the one with the widest, fixed track width.

Use as few tramlines as you can. Ideally, drive on less than 40% of the field area.

If you find some of your machines do not fit the fixed tramlines:


  adjust or adapt your existing machines so they run on the fixed tramlines
  invest in machinery that fits your fixed tramline spacing
  use a contractor equipped for a controlled traffic farming system


To reduce the risk of runoff and soil erosion down fixed tramlines, where possible fix tramlines across slopes and manually disrupt tramlines. You can disrupt tramlines by pulling a tine, spiked harrow or rotary harrow behind the rear wheel of a tractor or sprayer. Use this to loosen the soil to a depth of 6cm.

You can read case studies from the controlled traffic farming network.

How to tell if controlled traffic farming is working

You may need several years to gradually establish controlled traffic farming. A long-term machinery replacement plan can help you to decide how to spread the cost of new machinery.

Check if you can get funding for new precision farming equipment.

It can take a few seasons for soil structure to improve after adopting controlled traffic farming.  

You’ll see:


  better crop growth and improving yields as soil health improves
  crops that are more resilient to drought
  well-structured soil with spaces that allow water and air to move through the soil


You can monitor improvements in soil health and structure using the:


  Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB) Think Soils manual
  
AHDB soil health assessment



Soil should be less compacted, so you’re less likely to need cultivations that remove soil compaction, like sub-soiling.

Machinery and fuel costs will fall after the initial investment in any adapted or new machinery.

Controlled traffic farming is not working well if you notice runoff and soil erosion from fields or down the fixed tramlines.

You should not see: 


  any water channels in the field or on tramlines 
  mounds or fans of soil at the bottom of slopes 
  muddy water in ditches or watercourses


You can reduce runoff and soil erosion down tramlines by manually disrupting tramlines or sowing grass on the tramlines.





      
        
    Published 7 June 2021
    Last updated 14 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 December 2021
              Added link to funding options
            
            
              18 August 2021
              Added clarification that this is best practice but not mandatory advice.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Remove soil compaction
        Use cover crops or green manure
        Increase soil organic matter
        Use less fertiliser, manure and lime
        Reduce grassland management intensity next to watercourses

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Land management

  


  

  


    
  


    