During a crisis, when circumstances are unfamiliar and fast-changing, leaders find that they must improve their organizations’ responses, rather than follow predefined plans. Coping with prolonged uncertainty requires leaders to adhere to behaviors that help them look ahead. In this podcast, McKinsey senior partner Gemma D’Auria discusses how leaders can respond effectively by adhering to the following five practices:
    
    
.The teams have decision-making rights and must be able to think creatively to solve novel problems. Set a pragmatic and calm tone while demonstrating an optimism that instills confidence in others.. Take four specific steps every time: pause and take stock, assess the situation from multiple vantage points, try to anticipate what is likely to happen, and then act. The pause button is especially important in a crisis. It’s a stressful, even tragic, time for many. Ask questions, listen, be open, and prioritize the health and well-being of your people (as well as yourself).. Leaders often underestimate the importance of communication: they may wait too long before communicating or try to hide bad news in an attempt to be overly positive, which creates mistrust. To counter this tendency, leaders can try the following actions:
    Communicate frequently.
    Pause and breathe before a meeting or difficult discussion.
    Focus on the facts you have at the time.
    Keep messages short and simple.
    Share the stage with others.
For more details, please listen to the podcast or read the full transcript below. You can also learn more by reading “.”Podcast transcriptHello and welcome. You are listening to a podcast by McKinsey & Company, focused on COVID-19 response. I’m Amanda Schmitt, global risk learning manager at McKinsey & Company. Today I’m joined by Gemma D’Auria, a senior partner based out of McKinsey’s Dubai office. Gemma will be speaking with us about leadership during a crisis. Gemma, first question to start us off: What are some of the leadership behaviors that are most effective during a crisis like this one?Early in the days of this crisis, we conducted extensive research on what are the leadership behaviors that have made the greatest difference, and there are five leadership behaviors that we believe make the greatest difference. One of them is establishing early on a network of teams that actually have real decision-making rights and can think creatively about solutions to a novel problem.The second one is something that we call “deliberate calm coupled with bounded optimism.” And what we mean by that is that leaders need to set the realistic and pragmatic tone in a very deliberately calm way, so that they can get through the crisis and deal with challenges on a day-to-day basis. But they also need to be optimistic and instill confidence in their people that we will get out of this crisis as a result.Thirdly, decision making. One of the things we see is that you need to have a cycle of decision-making that has a number of specific steps: pause, assess, anticipate, and then act. And one of the things we see is that in a crisis, the pause button is very important. You need to take a pause before you can assess, because things are moving very fast and you need to take some distance in order to assess the situation. It’s almost like a new balcony and dance paradigm. You need to get on the balcony to actually be able to understand what is going on. And then there is the anticipate step, which is also often forgotten, because you know, in a crisis, you have the fire extinguisher. You want to get in there and do, do, do. That’s your first reaction. That’s a very human reaction. But actually, what you need to do is stop and anticipate. Try to see around the corner, what is likely to happen. Fourth, empathy. The tragedy of COVID-19 is first and foremost a humanitarian crisis, and people’s first questions are about their families. What happens if they get sick? What happens if they get laid off? And it’s extremely important that as a leader, you prioritize the health and well-being of your employees and also yourself.Last but not least, communication. Communication is a great, great tool that leaders often underestimate, particularly in a crisis, where we see two pitfalls. One pitfall is to wait for a long time before you communicate, because you want to have more facts, and there is this thing around, waiting for more facts to emerge and you do not communicate.The second pitfall is overconfidence in positive communication. And one of the things that we see is that you should never hide bad news in times of crisis. But of course, you need to have the deliberate calm and bounded optimism we talked about earlier. What this means is that communication should be about what you know, what you don’t know, and what you’re going to do to learn more. And it should be frequent. There is no such thing as too-frequent communication in these times. There is, however, a danger of overly complex communication. If there is one thing we have learned over the past few weeks, it’s that simpler is better.Very interesting things to think through. I’m sure it must be quite challenging for leaders to hold on to those ideal behaviors while subject to the stresses that this crisis is causing. How can leaders manage to stay calm and focus on the future when their organizations are in the midst of this crisis?It is very difficult in a crisis to display what we call, you know, this deliberate calm and bounded optimism about the future. And we have seen that there are a number of micro-practices that some leaders that are very good at this actually do. One of them is unifying your team behind a shared purpose. This is a time when people want to contribute and want to be part of something greater than themselves, but they need to be led. They need you as a leader to paint that picture for them. The second practice that is much more individual is literally just take a mindful minute. Breathe before a meeting. You know, taking just a little pause before something important grounds people so that they’re able to be more centered when they go into a difficult discussion or are about to face their people with a difficult piece of communication, for example.And on bounded optimism, one of the practices that we see is projecting confidence with humility. So being able to show vulnerability is extremely important, and this can be as simple as sharing what you do not know yet, but also what you are doing to find out what you don’t know. Another way to instill confidence and project bounded optimism is to create the psychological safety that your people need to actually come forward and express their concerns and ask questions, and for you to address those with curiosity and resolve, as opposed to with judgment and anxiety. And just creating a safe space where employees can actually voice their concerns and be heard goes a long way for you to actually instill this calm that you need to get through a crisis.Thanks, Gemma. That’s all very inspiring. Can you tell me, how should leaders think about decision making in such a fast-moving and uncertain environment?During a crisis, leaders will not get full clarity and all of the facts they wish they had, and maybe they will not have these facts for some time. And therefore, there is a new way of working that has to emerge. Make yourself pause. Take stock. Think about what is happening.And really then think, once you understand what is happening and assess what is happening from multiple vantage points, which is where your network of teams really helps, then try to anticipate what is likely to happen next. And then engage in another cycle of action.What we see is that you need the pause, because that also allows you to discern the strategic from the tactical decisions. You know, you don’t have to be at the core of every decision. In fact, one of the beautiful advantages of a network of teams, I think you can devolve decision-making. But if you don’t pause, you will not always be able to prioritize and figure out what are the decisions that you as a leader need to make and what are the decisions that other people need to make.And then what you also need to do is you have to pivot all the time in this time of crisis. And making sure that you have a real growth mindset and you can learn and pivot quickly is critical. Making sure in the network of teams you have established, you have leaders that can learn and pivot quickly is as important.Gemma, I’d love to dive a bit into the communication aspect of leadership. How should leaders think about communication and staying close to their stakeholders?In times of crisis, having a narrative that you constantly revise and adapt, both internally and externally, is very critical. And continued thoughtful, frequent communication is a signal that a leader is actively following up on an issue and is committed to addressing the challenges that present themselves. Focus on the facts as much as you have them, as much as you can. Be clear about what are the implication of those facts for your people and for the outside world. Three, keep messages short and simple. Four, give yourself time to address questions. People will have questions. You will need to respond to these questions.And the last thing I would say is share the stage. You, as a CEO, don’t have to do every single communication. You can actually assign clear communication roles for your leadership team, so that different people communicate at different times.It is going to be a team effort, and while some of the most critical communication pieces will have to come from the CEO and, you know, a CEO will have a very strong voice during these times, he or she does not have to be the only mouthpiece of the organization.Great. Thanks so much for being here with us today, Gemma. To wrap things up, can you share two or three things that you’d like listeners to take away from this podcast?Leadership in a crisis is very challenging, because it often means choosing a third way. It’s not about creating a burning platform, which is rarely helpful, versus instilling optimism, which might promote denial. Rather, it is about accepting the current state with the facts at hand but also providing a sense of hope that we will get through it.It is not about overplaying authority and taking control versus waiting for others to fix the issue. Rather, it is about being action-oriented and decisive in a way that is humble, open, curious, and vulnerable. It is not about top-down decision making versus a consultative approach, soliciting many, many stakeholders. Rather, it is about developing an informed perspective, tapping into a network of teams that have people with different vantage points, levels of expertise, and experience on the issue at hand.It is not about relying on pattern recognition and on what we have always done, versus making it up on the go and failing to leverage lessons from the past. Rather, it is about taking what we have learned from past experiences, but with a beginner’s mindset, with a curiosity, leaving it open to the possibility that new insights may still emerge at any point.It is not about relying on facts and data to make decisions, because you are never going have the full data set when you need it, versus just intuition-based decision making. It is about being decisive in taking action based on the data you have at that point in time, and pivoting and learning as you go and new perspectives develop.Lastly, it is not about making big, bold moves or announcements early on, versus not communicating at all until you have a more complete picture. Rather, it is about communicating often, in an authentic and empathetic way as more facts are known.