


RAND Space Launch Virtual Panel
by Bonnie L. Triezenberg, Yool Kim, Gary McLeod, D. Jason Cothern, Bruce McClintock
Related Topics: Space Science and Technology, Space Warfare, United States Space Force
Citation

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn








To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video


Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn
Embed



Add to website or blog
<iframe src="https://www.rand.org/pubs/presentations/PTA954-1/_jcr_content/par/product/par-research-brief/multimediavideoplaye.embed" width="580" height="326" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
Copy and paste the selected text
A panel discussion hosted by the RAND Space Enterprise Initiative tackles issues related to the global space launch enterprise. The panel of RAND Corporation experts joined Brigadier General D. Jason Cothern, Vice Commander of the Space and Missile Systems Center, to ask:

How will U.S. Space Force decisions affect domestic launch providers and the market in general?
How will recent trends affect future strategies and policies for responsive space launch?
What are the capabilities and limitations of U.S. space launch facilities?

The event was conducted virtually by the RAND Corporation on September 8, 2020. For information about future events related to space research, email space@rand.org.

Research conducted by

RAND Project AIR FORCE
RAND National Security Research Division



This report is part of the RAND Corporation Presentation series. RAND presentations may include briefings related to a body of RAND research, videos of congressional testimonies, and a multimedia presentation on a topic or RAND capability. All RAND presentations represent RAND's commitment to quality and objectivity.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/PTA954-1
Document Number: PT-A954-1
Year: 2020
Series: Presentations



Explore
Related Topics

Space Science and TechnologySpace WarfareUnited States Space Force

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Triezenberg, Bonnie L., Yool Kim, Gary McLeod, D. Jason Cothern, and Bruce McClintock, RAND Space Launch Virtual Panel. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/presentations/PTA954-1.html.
Triezenberg, Bonnie L., Yool Kim, Gary McLeod, D. Jason Cothern, and Bruce McClintock, RAND Space Launch Virtual Panel, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, PT-A954-1, 2020. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/presentations/PTA954-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



