
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Government veterinary profession technical skills and behaviours
  

  
  

  
    
  This document outlines the government veterinary profession’s technical skills and behaviours.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Veterinary Services 

      
      Published
      2 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        2 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    GVS profession technical skills and behaviours (HTML version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    GVS profession technical skills and behaviours (PDF version)
    
        PDF, 263KB, 12 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email contentteam@defra.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Technical skills and behaviours are the skills, knowledge, behaviours and experience that are needed to do something successfully. For the government veterinary profession, they’re grouped into 2 areas:


  technical skills: developed from the previous Government Veterinary Service (GVS) Competence Framework 2014 – you can progress a technical skill at a particular grade, developing from a basic awareness (A) to working (W) to practitioner (P) and specialist (S) as appropriate
  behaviours: aligned to Civil Service Success Profiles


The combination is used to indicate the typical knowledge and experience needed for each of the GVS roles in the career pathways.

They’re for all government staff working in a government veterinary role, or any person who wants to find out more about what is required for different government veterinary roles.




        
      

      
    Published 2 March 2020
    Last updated 2 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 April 2020
              Added PDF version of the GVS profession technical skills and behaviours document
            
            
              2 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability

  


  

  


    
  


    