
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pathways: Data Wrangling
  

  
  
  
      
  Government Analysis Function Learning Pathways - highlighting a route through learning focused on data wrangling.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Analysis Function

      
      Published
      1 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Data Wrangling

        
        
          Persona

        
        
          Summary

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Data Wrangling


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Description

The world of data is deep, complex, and always expanding and that’s why it is easier to understand why having the right data in the first place can make all the difference in business. The data wrangling pathway provides you with a deeper understanding of cleaning, linking, altering, and manipulating datasets using various technologies, tools, and platforms.

Learning Objectives


  Understand the key concepts and practices used to clean, manipulate, match, and alter datasets and databases using industry standard tools and technologies.
  Demonstrate the ability to use different tools and techniques for data wrangling to reduce time, increase accuracy and improve the quality of data and publications.
  Preparing data for analysis to communicate results effectively.


Length

This pathway contains four courses and one optional add on course.

Persona

To help decide if this is the pathway for you, this learning persona is designed to create a realistic representation of the intended learning audience.



General Background

Zilla is an analyst and has been working in analysis for some time.

Starting Point

Zilla works with large datasets and databases. She would like to know more about emerging trends in tools and technologies.

Perceived Needs

Zilla has worked in analysis for some time, but R & Python are something she has never used but would like to know more about as there is a drive towards using these languages more and more.

Special Considerations

Zilla would prefer a trainer-led series of courses as she is quite hesitant about making the switch to R or Python.

Summary

The data wrangling pathway provides you with a deeper understanding of cleaning, linking, altering, and manipulating datasets using various technologies, tools, and platforms.


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Back to Analytical Learning Pathways page.




      
        
    Published 1 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pathways: Data Visualisation
        Pathways: Managing Data
        Pathways: Text Analysis
        Pathways: Reproducible Analytical Pipelines
        Pathways: Data Quality

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    