
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Skills for the Mature Workforce – (OC04S19P1598)
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project which identifies barriers faced by older people to continuing in employment, and provide support to both individuals and businesses to address these barriers and increase economic productivity of businesses employing 50+ population in Coast to Capital. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      16 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        9 January 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      South East
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      8 January 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Details

Coast to Capitals ambition is to boost the productivity of their economy by giving people the skills they need not only to secure and maintain high quality jobs, but also to make their way through a potential portfolio of careers over their lifetime, earning an income that allows them to remain living within the area. This should be accessible to everyone, regardless of location, age, gender, skill level or ability.

The area’s economy will evolve significantly in the next few years, shaped by new technology, the growth of new businesses, and an ageing working population. Their challenge is to prepare for this future disruption, particularly where skills levels are lower, such as in Crawley, Arun and Adur, and where the skills of the existing workforce are out of date. The Coast to Capital area is typical of many, in needing to anticipate and invest in a strategy to change attitudes and approaches to skills development among employers, workers, young people and parents

The purpose of this call is to identify barriers faced by older people to continuing in employment, and provide support to both individuals and businesses to address these barriers and increase economic productivity of businesses employing 50+ population in Coast to Capital.

For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Coast to Capital LEP area.

Value

Approximately £2,000,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 08 January 2020

Completion date

Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission
To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.

It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.
The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to
E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details
If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 16 October 2019
    Last updated 9 January 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 January 2020
              Skills for the Mature Workforce – (OC04S19P1598) project call is now closed.
            
            
              12 November 2019
              The intervention rate has been added to section 4.2 of the call specification.
            
            
              16 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    