
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Open general export licences for military goods: collaborative project typhoon
  

  
  

  
    
  Licences for the export of military goods for the production, development or maintenance of Typhoon aircraft. See explanation below for which licence to use.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      23 February 2012
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon) - from June 2019 
    
        PDF, 331KB, 18 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon) 
    
        PDF, 341KB, 18 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Revoked: Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon) - from June 2019 (in force from 17 July 2019)
    
        PDF, 882KB, 16 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Revoked: Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative Project Typhoon) (in force from 17 January 2019)
    
        PDF, 886KB, 16 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
These open general export licences (OGEL) allow, subject to certain conditions, the export of military goods, software and technology for the production, development or maintenance of Typhoon aircraft to listed destinations.

Project Typhoon is a collaborative programme between the government’s of Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK for the development, production and sale of a European fighter aircraft (otherwise known as Eurofighter).

For more information about this OGEL, you can read the related frequently asked questions in ‘Notice to exporters 2010/23’.

Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon) - from June 2019

This version of the licence is available for registration.

Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon)

This version of the licence is no longer available for registration, but remains available for users who registered before 20 June 2019.

Reporting requirements

These OGELs are subject to reporting requirements under the open licence returns transparency initiative.

Revoked licences

The most recent revoked licence is available in the documents section.

You can find older revoked versions of the Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon) on the National Archives website.

You can find older revoked versions of the Open general export licence (military goods: collaborative project typhoon) - from June 2019 on the National Archives website.




        
      

      
    Published 23 February 2012
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              This Open General Export Licence has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              18 December 2020
              These OGELs have been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              17 January 2019
              Qatar added to the list of permitted destinations.
            
            
              6 April 2018
              Licence updated and amended to reflect new contact details for the Export Control Joint Unit.
            
            
              20 June 2016
              Licence updated to include Kuwait on the list of permitted destinations.
            
            
              6 October 2015
              MOD security requirements clarified. Clause added referring to pre-visit questionnaires.
            
            
              13 June 2014
              Licence amended to reflect the new Government Security Classification System.
            
            
              1 January 2014
              Updated to reflect new reporting process in connection with the transparency initiative.
            
            
              23 February 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Open general export licences for military goods: A400M collaborative programme
        Open general licence (Iraq)
        Open general export licence (exports in support of joint strike fighter: F-35 Lightning II)
        General export authorisation: trade in torture goods
        Open general trade control licence (insurance or re-insurance)

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    