
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Catch the ChemBio SCENT!
  

  
  

  
    
  This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition seeks proposals for novel technologies for screening, collecting and exploiting ChemBio materials.   

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      3 November 2021
      Last updated
      
        7 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Catch the ChemBio SCENT! Screening, Collecting and Exploiting Novel Technologies
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Catch the ChemBio SCENT ISC Terms
    
        PDF, 267 KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Catch the ChemBio SCENT ISC Schedules
    
        PDF, 380 KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals that can address challenges associated with screening for, the preservation of sample / evidence, and the attribution of hazardous chemical and biological (ChemBio) materials. New technology options or technical approaches could ultimately help both the successful identification of material and directly / indirectly aid in bringing perpetrators to justice.

As well as addressing this diverse set of technical requirements, one of the goals of ‘Catch the ChemBio SCENT!’ is to engage with a non-traditional ChemBio supplier base (for example suppliers who have not worked in Defence and Security before) in order to yield innovative solutions.

Up to £1M is available to fund multiple emerging innovations (low technology readiness level (TRL)) to demonstrate proof-of-concept during Phase 1 of the competition. It is expected that proposals will not exceed £100K.

It is anticipated that there will be a second phase of this competition with additional funding, which will seek to further develop promising solutions from Phase 1 as well as identify and accelerate other solutions at a higher TRL.

This competition is jointly funded by the UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) and the US Department of Defense (DOD), the relationship will operate under and be governed by an extant memorandum of understanding between both nations. Both the MOD and DOD will have access to proposals submitted under this competition in order to jointly assess which proposals to fund.



        
      

      
    Published 3 November 2021
    Last updated 7 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 December 2021
              Clarification Q&A from the Launch Event and supplier one-to-one sessions have been uploaded to the end of the competition document.
            
            
              5 November 2021
              Amendment to Catch the ChemBio SCENT ISC Terms Document - Removed DEFCON 126 (International Collaboration) and amended the note relating to DEFCON 705.
            
            
              3 November 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) Open Call for Innovation
        Competition: Defence Innovation Loans
        Defence and Security Accelerator funded contracts
        Apply For Funding
        Market Exploration

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    