
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: D2N2 Apprenticeship and Jobs Hub – OC08S21P1833 
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project/s designed to provide improved access to quality advice on apprenticeships and skills for employers and learners and access to funding for responsive skills.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      18 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        13 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      East Midlands
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      10 June 2021
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided below is for reference purposes only.


Details

Through this Call D2N2 LEP is seeking a programme of activity to broker opportunities for Apprenticeship levy to be used as match to support new apprenticeship starts in relevant SMEs within the levy payer’s supply chain or industry sector and build competitive advantage through the development and increase of high quality apprenticeships prioritising the following key sectors:


  
    Creative and digital
  
  
    Transport equipment manufacturing
  
  
    Visitor economy
  
  
    Transport and logistics
  
  
    Professional and scientific services including life sciences
  
  
    Construction
  
  
    Food and drink manufacturing
  
  
    Health and social care
  


The programme should seek to develop innovative approaches to ensure Apprenticeship funding and levy is used effectively across D2N2 to achieve skills for growth and meet the needs of growing or skills shortage sectors identified in the D2N2 Economic Growth and Recovery strategy particularly.


  
    Clean energy
  
  
    Modular construction methods and retrofitting
  
  
    Health and MedTech
  
  
    Digital
  
  
    Advanced manufacturing
  


For more information, download the call specification. 

Location

The project must cover the D2N2 LEP area.

Value

Approximately £ 2,000,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 10 June 2021

Completion date

Projects must be financially completed (i.e. have a proposed Financial Completion Date) no later than 31st December 2023; however, the Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.
The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details
If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.





      

      
        
    Published 18 March 2021
    Last updated 13 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 June 2021
              D2N2 Apprenticeship and Jobs Hub – OC08S21P1833 call is now closed.
            
            
              18 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    