
  
    
      Definitions

    

      
        
  Help with terms used in this manual

      
        
          

    
  
    
      Term
      Definition
    
  
  
    
      16 to 19 study programmes
      All students aged 16 to 19 in England are funded for an individual study programme. Study programmes have a core aim, are tailored to each student, have clear study and/or employment goals reflecting the student’s prior attainment, and include:  •	substantial qualifications•	mathematics and English for students who have not achieved grade A* to C or 9 to 4 at GCSE in these subjects •	high quality work experience or work preparation •	added value non-qualification activity that supports the students’ goals and is integrated into the study programme
    
    
      Access to Higher Education (HE) diploma
      A qualification that prepares people without traditional qualifications for study at university.
    
    
      Adult education budget
      Funding for education and training to any student aged 19 and over, to provide the skills and learning they need to equip them for work, an apprenticeship or other learning.
    
    
      Applied General qualifications
      Level 3 qualifications for post-16 students. Applied General qualifications allow entry to a range of higher education courses, either by meeting the entry requirements in their own right or being accepted alongside and adding value to other level 3 qualifications such as A Levels. Applied General qualifications are included in DfE’s 16 to 18 school and college performance tables.
    
    
      Apprenticeship
      An apprenticeship is a job that combines practical training with study. For more information, see A guide to apprenticeships.
    
    
      Awarding organisation
      An organisation that develops, delivers and awards qualifications.
    
    
      Certification end date
      The last date on which an awarding organisation has indicated that certification is available.
    
    
      Components of qualifications
      A discrete part of a qualification. For the purposes of this manual, a discrete part of the qualification that providers of education and training can deliver on a standalone basis, and that awarding organisations will certificate.
    
    
      Core Maths
      Core maths qualifications are suited to students who are wanting to progress to a higher level of study with a particular mathematical focus, (for instance STEM); they will also prepare students for further study and careers with a strong quantitative element, such as geography and psychology.
    
    
      Devolved areas
      From August 2019, 6 mayoral combined authorities and the Mayor of London received certain devolved adult education functions, funded by the adult education budget (AEB). The current devolved authorities are Cambridgeshire and Peterborough; Greater Manchester; Liverpool City Region; Tees Valley; West Midlands; and West of England.  From August 2020, North of Tyne Combined Authority will also take responsibility of AEB funded education for its residents. Subject to Sheffield City Region being ready and the statutory test being met, it is due to take on devolved AEB responsibilities from August 2021. The devolved authority areas will continue to offer the statutory entitlement offers to students living in their areas. The approval principles for all other qualification offers described in this manual do not apply to areas of England where the AEB is devolved.
    
    
      Essential Digital Skills Qualification (EDSQ)
      New qualifications at entry level and level 1, for adults with no or low digital skills who want to gain digital skills for a specific life, work or study purpose. These qualifications are based on new national standards for essential digital skills.
    
    
      European Social Fund (ESF)
      Part of the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) Growth Programme for England in 2014 to 2020. ESF is designed to increase sustainable economic and social inclusion in the European Union, by helping people who have difficulties finding work, and improving the skills of the workforce.
    
    
      Find a Learning Aim (FaLA)
      A web-based search facility for qualifications and their components, and their associated validity and funding details in England.
    
    
      Functional Skills qualification
      Qualifications to help people gain fundamental applied skills in English, mathematics, and information and communication technology (ICT). Functional skills subject criteria for English, mathematics and ICT specify the skills standards, coverage and range for the qualifications at each level.
    
    
      Funded qualification offer
      A group of regulated qualifications that meet our approval principles for funding, and for delivering to defined groups of students.
    
    
      Funding approval
      Adding a qualification to one or more of our funded offers if that qualification meets our approval principles for public funding.
    
    
      Funding approval moratorium
      From 1 September 2020, we will stop considering new regulated qualifications at level 3 and below for funding approval, for students aged 16 and over (including 19 plus). This moratorium is separate from the moratorium on new technical or applied qualifications being added to the 16 to 18 performance tables but will run alongside it.
    
    
      Funding validity
      Showing that a qualification will receive public funding from us within a specific qualification offer.
    
    
      Funding year
      The period of time that starts on 1 August in one year and finishes on 31 July in the following year.
    
    
      Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education
      An employer-led crown Non-Departmental Public Body, which develops, approves and publishes occupational standards and apprenticeship assessment plans. It also approves the content of T Levels and sets the occupational maps relevant to both T Levels and apprenticeships.
    
    
      Lifetime Skills Guarantee
      Announced by the Prime Minister in 2020, part of transforming the skills system to ensure more people can get the skills they need to progress into employment. This includes Level 3 qualifications.
    
    
      Higher Technical Qualifications (HTQs)
      
Technical qualifications at level 4 and 5 approved by the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education and which are part of the government’s reform of higher technical education.
    
    
      National Careers Service
      Free and impartial information, advice and guidance to help people with decisions about careers, courses and work. The service is available to people who live in England and is supported by qualified careers advisers.
    
    
      Non-regulated provision
      Delivery of learning that does not lead towards a student achieving a qualification appearing on Ofqual’s Register of Regulated Qualifications
    
    
      Occupational standard
      These are standards published by the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education. They set out the knowledge skills and behaviours that employers consider are required for that occupation.  The technical qualifications forming part of T Levels are approved against the standards and apprentices receive an End Point Assessment to establish whether they have achieved the standard. A standard is not qualification based but may include a mandatory qualification.
    
    
      Ofqual
      The Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation regulates qualifications, examinations and assessment in England. Ofqual is independent of government and reports directly to Parliament.
    
    
      Operational end date
      The date on which the qualification is no longer available to new students, because there is insufficient time for new candidates to complete all the learning required before the certification end date.
    
    
      Operational start date
      The date on which the qualification becomes available for teaching to students.
    
    
      Performance tables
      DfE’s school and college performance tables are published annually (with the exception of 2020 and 2021 due to the pandemic), reporting key stage 2 results for primary schools in December; GCSE and equivalent results for secondary schools (provisional results in October and revised results in late January); and A Levels and other 16 to 18 results for schools and colleges in late January and March. School and college performance tables provide a reliable, accessible source of comparative information on pupil attainment and progress.
    
    
      Qualification level
      A relative indication of how demanding the qualification is, assigned by an awarding organisation in line with Ofqual’s published level descriptors.
    
    
      Qualification size
      An indication of how long a provider of education and training will take to deliver the qualification to a student, measured in guided learning hours (GLH). We use the regulated GLH values in Ofqual’s Register of Regulated Qualifications.
    
    
      Qualification title
      The title of the qualification, as it appears in Ofqual’s Register of Regulated Qualifications.
    
    
      Qualifications and Credit Framework (QCF)
      This was the national framework for vocational qualifications in England, Northern Ireland and Wales until October 2015. It provided a system for indicating level and size of qualifications and for credit transfer of qualification units, so that qualifications could be ‘built’ through accumulation of credit. It was withdrawn in 2015 by Ofqual and replaced by the Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF).
    
    
      Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA)
      QAA is an independent body monitoring and advising on standards in higher education in the United Kingdom. QAA manages the scheme for the recognition and quality assurance of Access to Higher Education diplomas.
    
    
      Redeveloped qualifications
      Tech Levels and Applied General qualifications at level 3 that met the criteria to be in the 16 to 18 performance tables from 2018 onwards.
    
    
      Register of Regulated Qualifications
      Ofqual’s register that contains details of recognised awarding organisations and the regulated qualifications that they offer.
    
    
      Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF)
      A framework for understanding the level and size of all regulated qualifications. It was introduced by Ofqual in October 2015.
    
    
      Regulation start date
      The date on which the qualification, offered by a recognised awarding organisation, first appears on Ofqual’s Register of Regulated Qualifications.
    
    
      Review month
      The month in the funding year that we consider qualifications for funding approval.
    
    
      Sector subject area (SSA)
      A classification of qualifications into business sectors or subject areas, maintained by Ofqual. There are 15 broad ‘tier 1’ subject areas and 50 more detailed ‘tier 2’ sub-sector subject areas.
    
    
      ‘Stepping stone’ qualifications
      Modular (unitised) qualifications at entry level and level 1, used to target specific English and maths topics that a student might need to focus on, before progressing to a Functional Skills or GCSE qualification.
    
    
      Student Loans Company
      A non-profit making government-owned organisation that administers loans and grants to students in universities and colleges in the UK.
    
    
      T Levels
      New two-year courses at level 3 started in September 2020, which are taken after GCSEs and are broadly equivalent to 3 A Levels. These courses are approved by the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education and have been developed in collaboration with employers and businesses, so that the content meets the needs of industry and prepares students for work.  A T Level includes three compulsory parts: a technical qualification, an industry placement, a maths and English exit requirement and any other elements determined by the Institute. They will provide the knowledge and experience needed to progress into skilled employment, further study or a higher apprenticeship.
    
    
      Tech Awards
      Technical Awards are level 1 and level 2 qualifications in non-English Baccalaureate (EBacc) subjects that equip students with applied knowledge not usually acquired through general education. They focus on applied study of a sector or occupational group, including the acquisition of associated practical or technical skills where appropriate. These qualifications are included in DfE’s secondary (key stage 4) performance tables.
    
    
      Technical Certificates (Tech Certs)
      Level 2 technical qualifications for post-16 students wishing to specialise in a specific industry, occupation or technical role. They cover occupations where employers recognise entry at level 2 or where a level 2 qualification is required before students can progress to a Tech Level. They equip students with specialist knowledge and skills, enabling entry to an apprenticeship, employment or progression to a Tech Level. In some cases, they provide a ‘licence to practise’ or exemption from professional exams. They are included in DfE’s 16 to 18 school and college performance tables.
    
    
      Tech Levels
      Level 3 technical qualifications that are recognised by employers. They are for post-16 students wishing to specialise in a specific industry, occupation or technical role. They equip a student with specialist knowledge and skills, enabling entry to an apprenticeship or other employment, or progression to a related higher education course. In some cases, these qualifications provide a ‘licence to practise’ or exemption from professional exams. They are included in DfE’s 16 to 18 school and college performance tables.
    
    
      Technical route
      Technical routes are structured around clusters of occupations that share common knowledge and skills, and offer progression to and through skilled employment
    
    
      Traineeships
      An education and training programme with work experience that prepares young people for their future careers by helping them to become ‘work ready’. Traineeships are designed to help young people aged 16 to 24 who do not yet have the appropriate skills or experience. They provide the essential work preparation training, English, maths and work experience needed to secure an apprenticeship or employment.
    
  





          
        
  
