
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Searching the Companies House register
  

  
  
  
      
  How to follow companies and find company information for free using our online services.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Companies House 

      
      Published
      19 June 2019
      Last updated
      
        22 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Free information on Companies House Service (CHS)

        
        
          Follow companies for free

        
        
          WebCHeck (service closing later in 2021)

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
With over 4 million companies registered and over 7 million documents filed each year, there are lots of ways to find the company information you’re searching for.

How to find company information

Free information on Companies House Service (CHS)

CHS makes all of the public data we hold on companies available free of charge.

Free access to the data is available through our CHS web service and application program interface (API). This allows both consumers and technology providers access to real time updates on companies.

Unlike our other services, you do not have to register to view company information on CHS.


Use CHS to search for company data for free.


You can get details about a company for free, including:


  basic company information (including company type, registered office address etc)
  the nature of business (SIC)
  the company status (for example, live, dissolved etc.)
  the date of last accounts or confirmation statement filed
  the date of next accounts or confirmation statement due
  full transaction filing
  images of documents
  officer searching
  current and resigned officers
  disqualified directors
  previous and dissolved names search
  mortgage charge data
  insolvency information


 Records of dissolved companies

Following the government’s response to the Corporate Transparency and Register Reform consultation, we’ve:


  stopped removing dissolved records from CHS
  added the records of all companies dissolved since January 2010 to CHS


Previously, records of dissolved companies were removed from CHS after 6 years (from the date of dissolution).

As part of our commitment to enhancing corporate transparency, we’ll continue to keep records of dissolved companies for 20 years from the date of dissolution. These records are currently available on other Companies House products for a fee.

Our long term intention is to make these dissolved records available for free on CHS. But we will not do this until the law is changed to allow greater protection of personal information on the public register.

It’s important that we balance corporate transparency with personal data privacy concerns. If you’re currently a company officer (or were previously), you may wish to review your company records to check if you’ll be affected by this change.

See our guidance on restricting the disclosure of personal information.

Follow companies for free

Follow is a part of CHS which lets you receive free email alerts of company transactions. The alert tells you instantly what’s been filed with us, as soon as we’ve accepted it.

The email alert includes a link to the filing history of the company, where you can download a copy of the document for free.

How to follow

The Follow service is available free of charge on Companies House Service (CHS).

To begin following companies:


  Sign in once you’ve registered an email address and password.
  Search for a company to follow.
  Select the company.
  Click on ‘Follow this company’.


WebCHeck (service closing later in 2021)

WebCHeck allows access to company information. There’s no need to set up an account and most documents are available as images to download and view within minutes.


We are closing our WebCHeck services in 2021. Read more about the closure of WebCHeck.


Free basic information

Our free public information includes:


  basic information including company type and registered office address
  the nature of business or standard industrial classification (SIC)
  company status, such as ‘live’ or ‘dissolved’
  date of last accounts or confirmation statement filed
  date of next accounts or confirmation statement due
  previous company names
  current officer details


WebCHeck fees

Use your debit or credit card or PayPal to pay at our secure checkout page, then proceed to download your documents.

Basic company information is free, but there’s a fee for documents and reports. See Companies House fees for a full list of costs.

You can add documents to your shopping basket up to an order limit of £50.

Before you make a purchase you’ll need to register a password and email address. We can then let you know when your documents are ready to access. Documents will be available in your download area for viewing or saving for 10 days, or for 4 days once opened.

Disqualified directors on WebCHeck
You can access information about disqualified directors using WebCHeck. Search by name and select from the list of matches to view:


  name and address
  date of birth
  nationality
  number of current disqualifications
  period of disqualification
  reason for disqualification


Search for company information on WebCHeck with charges of £1 per document image and basic information free of charge.




      
        
    Published 19 June 2019
    Last updated 22 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 January 2021
              Records of dissolved companies since 2010 have been added to Companies House Service (CHS).
            
            
              18 September 2020
              Update to records of dissolved companies on CHS following the government’s response to the Corporate Transparency and Register Reform consultation.
            
            
              19 June 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        A list of all companies registered with Companies House to date
        Company registers
        Research at Companies House
        Request for a list of newly formed companies
        Registering for email reminders from Companies House

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    