
      



  
    


      
    Promotional material
  

  
  
    Disability Confident promotional material and case studies
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Cymraeg
        
    
  

  


  
    
  Promotional material that can used by Disability Confident employers to promote the scheme. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Work and Pensions

      
      Published
      12 April 2019
      Last updated
      
        7 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Disability Confident: welcome guide for new members
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Disability Confident welcome guide for new members
    
        PDF, 940KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accessible.formats@dwp.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Disability Confident branding guidelines
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Disability Confident branding guidelines
    
        PDF, 262KB, 7 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accessible.formats@dwp.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Sample social media posts to support Disability Confident
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Graphic: 11 million employees work for Disability Confident businesses (Facebook)
    
        JPEG, 398KB
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Graphic: 11 million employees work for Disability Confident businesses (Twitter)
    
        JPEG, 401KB
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Graphic: 20,000 Disability Confident employers (Facebook)
    
        JPEG, 329KB
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Graphic: 20,000 Disability Confident employers (Twitter)
    
        JPEG, 337KB
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Animated GIF to use on social media (open and then save to your device)
    
        GIF, 1.4MB
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Case study: Maddie at Sodexo in Guildford
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Case study: Gareth at RSBi/City Building in Glasgow
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Case study: Matthew at Zurich
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Case study: Adam at Marriott in Liverpool
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Disability Confident campaign works with employers to remove barriers, increase understanding and ensure that disabled people have the opportunities to fulfil their potential.

Use these materials in your internal communications, on your website and on social media to support the Disability Confident campaign.

If you need any of the materials in an alternative format, contact dwp.disabilityconfident@dwp.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 12 April 2019
    Last updated 7 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 April 2021
              Added new social media graphics.
            
            
              28 November 2019
              Added case studies in Welsh.
            
            
              11 September 2019
              Updated Disability Confident welcome guide for new members HTML and PDF: changed to show Disability Confident award now lasts for 3 years.
            
            
              1 July 2019
              Added the Disability Confident welcome guide for new members of the scheme.
            
            
              22 May 2019
              Added 2 new case studies: Matthew at Zurich and Adam at Marriott.
            
            
              24 April 2019
              Added Disability Confident branding guidelines.
            
            
              12 April 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Employing disabled people and people with health conditions
        Help and support for young disabled people to find and stay in work
        Disability Confident 1 year on: breaking down the barriers to employment
        Voluntary reporting on disability, mental health and wellbeing
        Disability Confident and CIPD: guide for line managers on employing people with a disability or health condition

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Work and disabled people
        Disability rights

  


  

  


    
  


    