More leaders are asking questions about the future of their organization’s operating model due to the effects of the pandemic. However, successfully shifting to a new way of working requires more than redrawing boxes and lines.McKinsey research found transformations that touched seven or more of the 12 elements of an operating model (see Exhibit) were  to experience a successful redesign. But, with a dozen elements to focus on, where should an organization start? Do certain elements matter more than others?New survey results reveal the answer: Not all elements are created equal. We sampled more than 1,300 senior leaders to assess their organization against best-practice indicators across these elements. Indicators were then linked back to overall organizational efficacy to gauge their relative importance. Of the 12 operating model elements, three stand out as having an outsized impact on organizational efficacy:Our research found organizations that prioritized effective practices in these elements were two to three times more likely to be perceived as effective than those that did not have clear strengths in these areas. Even within that group, the impact of governance and culture was particularly stark—strong scores on these elements were more likely to be associated with highly effective organizations.What these insights confirm is that in today’s highly interdependent and fast-paced world, prioritizing operating model changes that drive “connective tissue”—i.e., high-quality horizontal (between group) and group interactions—are likely to be more impactful than those that focus on tweaking the primacy of the individual or hierarchy.Indeed, governance, culture, and workforce planning taken together enable leaders to drive the value-creating, forward-thinking interactions required to deliver complex enterprise-level strategy (e.g., fostering robust debate, common norms, dynamic teaming), as opposed to more siloed individual or hierarchical team self-maximization. This conclusion intuitively supports our  that the healthiest organizations—those placing equal focus on “how they run the place”—deliver three times the total shareholder returns (TSR) of those that underplay organizational health over the long term.Where, then, should one start when redesigning an organization’s operating model? Leaders should take a moment to ensure they can answer these critical questions:As a parting thought, these initial survey insights also indicate that starting with governance will go a long way towards addressing these questions. It’s always critical for organizations to deliberately craft a thoughtful governance structure that clearly articulates the mandates, decision rights, roles, and metrics of important bodies. However, this is even more crucial for leaders striving to drive transformational change. Leaders should seize the opportunity not only to capture the value that high-quality governance can deliver, but to take the initiative to support others in practicing the new behaviors of the future-state organization.