
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Ports and port systems: cyber security code of practice
  

  
  

  
    
  Code of practice for use by those with responsibility for protecting the technical systems of port facilities and vessels docked in ports.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Transport and Maritime and Coastguard Agency

      
      Published
      16 August 2016
      Last updated
      
        27 January 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Good practice guide: cyber security for ports and port systems
    
        PDF, 2.26MB, 71 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webmasterdft@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The code provides actionable advice on:


  developing a cyber security assessment and plan for important assets, processes and potential vulnerabilities
  devising the most appropriate mitigation measures
  having the correct governance structures, roles, responsibilities and processes
  handling security breaches and incidents
  highlighting national and international standards used and the relationship to existing regulation


This information should be used with our cyber security for ships guidance.

The guidance was produced by the Institution of Engineering and Technology in conjuction with the Department for Transport.



        
      

      
    Published 16 August 2016
    Last updated 27 January 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              27 January 2020
              2020 version of guidance, entitled 'Good practice guide: cyber security for ports and port systems', released.
            
            
              16 August 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Ship security: cyber security code of practice
        Protecting the maritime industry from cyber attacks
        Social Value Implementation and Measurement Project case studies
        City Deal: Oxford and Oxfordshire
        UK-Illinois trade and investment highlights

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Ports, harbours and offshore installations
        UK economy

  


  

  


    
  


    