
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    SKYNET Enduring Capability (SKEC) programme
  

  
  
  
      
  Engage with the Ministry of Defence (MOD) on SKYNET Enduring Capability (SKEC), the next generation of solutions for future satellite communication programmes. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      6 November 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About the SKYNET Programme

        
        
          About SKEC


        
        
          Get involved with the SKEC programme

        
        
          Industry engagement

        
        
          SKYNET Assured Capability (AC) Consultation

        
        
          Requests for Information (RFI)

        
        
          SKYNET Future Acquisition Strategy: RFI


        
        
          
SKEC technical seminars

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
About the SKYNET Programme

SKYNET is a family of military communications satellites, currently operated for the Ministry of Defence (MOD), that provides strategic communication services to the UK Armed Forces and allies.  SKYNET 5 is the most recent generation of this family.

The SKYNET Enduring Capability (SKEC) programme will deliver the next era of satellite communications (SATCOM) to the MOD using new space assets and a way to monitor and control them.  These assets will also be supported by additional commercial services to provide a reliable and robust communications service.

About SKEC


The MOD SKEC Team are currently defining the future of the MOD’s satellite communications capabilities.  New technologies and services in the space sector are emerging all the time, along with new threats, risks and hazards as space gets busier and more competitive.

In the same way that mobile phones need more data and bandwidth, with every new user and new technology, so do military communications and these demands are growing quickly.

To meet these additional demands, the MOD SKEC team want to build a network of satellites, ground stations and other user services to provide first class communications for government, allies and especially our defence personnel, whether they’re on operational duty or keeping in touch with family and friends whilst deployed.

Get involved with the SKEC programme

To build this new network the MOD SKEC Team would like to work with innovators in industry, academia and other government bodies, including our closest allies, to understand new trends and new opportunities and to encourage research and development.

To meet the needs of SKYNET, we are currently investigating:


  new ideas, capabilities and services
  the exploitation of our existing systems and information
  terminals, ground equipment and other infrastructure
  ways to improve our network efficiency and customer satisfaction
  tools and technologies to deal with risks, hazards and hostile threats
  using combinations of the best available military and civilian SATCOM services
  new technologies to invest in, develop and encourage
  future technologies and ways to improve the management of our core network.


Industry engagement

The initial plan for industry engagement for the SKEC programme includes the following:


  Future Acquisition Strategy RFI: March 2021
  Assured Capability Protective measures: June 2021


The UK MOD is continuing to develop the SKYNET Enduring Capability requirement set and we are taking the time to ensure that this is properly defined and articulated clearly.  This is likely to result in a delay against the initial draft timescales shared.  Further industry engagement may be sought by UK MOD in due course.

We expect to be able to provide further clarity on future timelines in quarter 1 of 2022.

SKYNET Assured Capability (AC) Consultation

The SKYNET Enduring Capability (EC) Team conducted a consultation on Assured Capability (AC) for the SKYNET EC Spacecraft Procurement. The MOD is interested in understanding the implications, advantages and disadvantages for Industry of this proposed AC approach.

The MOD may evolve the approach as a result of this consultation. As part of the briefing a small question set was posed, and participants were requested to provide written feedback in the form of a short discussion point paper on these questions following the event. These responses are to be received no later than 11pm (GMT) 1 July 2021.

One-to-one sessions will be held virtually over the period 5 to 30 July 2021 to discuss this feedback and participants will only be invited if MOD requires clarification on submissions received.

All briefing material, slides, video and the question set for the AC consultation has been made available to those who registered for the briefing on the SKYNET Defence Share.

If you wish to register for a SKYNET Defence Share account, or have any other questions, please contact the SKYNET team at ISSDel-Net-SatcomSKEC-IE-Grp@mod.gov.uk.

Requests for Information (RFI)

The SKYNET Programme will at various times release Requests for Information (RFI) to industry in order to examine specific capability or technology topics.  Formal publication of RFIs will be via the Defence Share portal.  For information on how to access and register for Defence Share please see below or contact the SKEC Team.

SKYNET Future Acquisition Strategy: RFI


The MOD SKEC team released a Request for Information (RFI) on Wednesday 3 March 2021. The RFI sought feedback on early concept options for future SKYNET systems/services integration, acquisition and service delivery in the 2028+ timeframe, looking beyond already-endorsed procurements such as Service Delivery Wrap (SDW), SKEC space segment, etc.

This RFI was closed at 11pm (GMT) on 30 April 2021.  The MOD would like to thank all participants for their submissions and are currently evaluating all responses.

If you have any questions or would like a soft copy of the RFI, please contact the SKYNET team at ISSDel-Net-SatcomSKEC-IE-Grp@mod.gov.uk.


SKEC technical seminars

The SKEC Team would like to invite Industry, Academia and other bodies to a series of MOD facilitated seminars on satellite technology, to discuss innovative ideas, approaches and capabilities that could be relevant to the project, initially with a focus on:


  propulsion technologies
  launch strategies
  inter-satellite links
  communications security
  telemetry, tracking and command technologies
  ground segment and global footprint
  satellite-based situational awareness technologies
  in-orbit servicing


It is anticipated that the SKEC satellites will be in-service until at least 2040 and the MOD are interested in both current and emerging technologies in these areas.

Contact the MOD SKEC Team if your solutions could enhance any of the key satellite performance metrics (communications throughput, power generation capacity, propulsion capability); or other important system drivers including timescales; costs; interoperability; risk and resilience; and the system’s geographic coverage.

Contact us

If you think you and your team could help the MOD SKEC Team meet any of these challenges, then we’d be very interested to hear from you.  Please contact us at ISSDel-Net-SatcomSKEC-IE-Grp@mod.gov.uk.

More information

You can find out more information on our collaborative site Defence Share. This is a secure site and if you wish to apply for access please request this by emailing the workspace manager at ISSDel-Net-SatcomSKEC-IE-Grp@mod.gov.uk.

There is also further information on the SKEC programme and other MOD contracts at Defence Contracts Online (DCO) at the new Defence Sourcing Portal (DSP) which is now live. You can login or register as a user on the official e-sourcing platform which advertises new contract opportunities tender and information on doing business with the MOD.

Suppliers should register for access using the ‘Register now; button on the DSP homepage. The DCO will be retired in April 2021.

Please note that MOD opportunities advertised prior to the 15 February 2021 will still be processed to conclusion on the Defence Contracts Online (DCO) portal.

To access SKEC and other opportunities in the Defence supply chain follow @defenceproc on Twitter.





      
        
    Published 6 November 2020
    Last updated 29 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 September 2021
              Updated text in the Industry engagement section.
            
            
              10 June 2021
              Updated the: SKYNET Enduring Capability (SKEC) programme page.
            
            
              13 May 2021
              Addition of: SKYNET Assured Capability (AC) Consultation Advance Notice section.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              Updated content: RFI  extension date is now until 30th April.
            
            
              18 March 2021
              Updated the bullet points under the SKEC Technical Seminars heading.
            
            
              10 March 2021
              Updated the information under the 'SKYNET Future Acquisition Strategy: RFI' heading.
            
            
              23 February 2021
              Updated the page content as of 22 February 2021.
            
            
              6 November 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence STEM engagement
        Global offshore wind
        How defence contributes to the prosperity of the UK and supports the UK economy
        Training and exercise deaths in the UK Armed Forces: 2017
        Influenza immunisation programme for England: GP patient groups data collection survey season 2013 to 2014

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    