
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    HMCTS services: Video Hearings service
  

  
  
  
      
  Developing the Video Hearings service to support how we deliver justice

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Courts & Tribunals Service

      
      Published
      14 May 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Aims and progress

        
        
          Looking ahead in 2021

        
        
          Who we’re working with

        
        
          Further information about this project

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Increased use of audio and video technology has enabled us to keep justice moving throughout the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. At the discretion of the judiciary, thousands of hearings have taken place remotely, allowing cases to progress safely.

The Video Hearings (VH) service continues to introduce new technology and modern ways of working to the way we administer justice. Unlike off-the-shelf video platforms, the service seeks to replicate the formality and experience of a court or tribunal hearing.

The service provides judges with an alternative option to attendance in person, where they feel it is appropriate. Participants benefit from the reduced disruption, cost and inconvenience of attending a court or tribunal hearing centre.

The VH service has the same look and feel as other GOV.UK online services, such as appealing a tax decision or managing a leasehold dispute. This means that if a video hearing is needed as part of a process, the experience is familiar and easy to navigate for users.

Participants, legal professionals and judges using the service are supported by dedicated staff who provide support in the lead up to and during the hearing.

In time, the service will integrate with other Reform services such as Scheduling and Listing, to bring a more streamlined and sustainable approach to the administration of justice.

Aims and progress


  
    
      Objectives
      Achievements
    
  
  
    
      Increase flexibility so hearings can take place in court, fully remotely or a combination, at the discretion of the judge
      Video hearings are accessible using a simple website link
    
    
      Provide support for the judiciary in how they choose to conduct hearings
      A service that meets the needs of judges, professional court users and litigants in person
    
    
      Provide audio-video technology that is accessible and supports open justice
      Dedicated staff support participants and the judiciary before and during a hearing
    
    
      Provide a service that replicates the formality and experience of a court or tribunal hearing
      Independent feedback from the London School of Economics confirms users find the system “convenient, robust and easy to use.”
    
    
      Integrate with other reform services to improve the administration of justice
       
    
  




Judge Rachel Perez, Upper Tribunal, Administrative Appeals Chamber said:


  The service from the video hearings team, and the technology, are phenomenal. The skill in the tech is the way it is made so simple to read and use. The clerking team on the chat function are incredible.


Looking ahead in 2021

Our aim is to expand the Video Hearings service over the course of the Reform Programme, to test it and make it available in all jurisdictions.

By the end of 2021 the service will:


  be available in a wide range of jurisdictions
  meet Welsh language requirements
  be accessible on Android devices
  accessible on smartphone


Who we’re working with


  Judicial Working Group, chaired by Mrs Justice Cutts
  Professional legal bodies
  Litigants in Person Engagement Group
  HMCTS Digital Inclusion Team


Further information about this project


  HMCTS Public User Event 2020: Lessons from COVID-19 to enhance users’ experience of remote hearings
  Evaluation of court and tribunal video hearings process published
  Video Hearings service: guidance for joining a hearing
  London School of Economics - Video Hearings Process Evaluation






      
        
    Published 14 May 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Video Hearings Service: join from a corporate network
        How to join a Cloud Video Platform (CVP) hearing
        HMCTS Video Hearings service: guidance for joining a hearing
        How HMCTS uses telephone and video hearings
        HMCTS Video Hearings process evaluation (phase 2) final report

  




      

    Collection

  


        HMCTS Reform Programme: fact sheets

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Civil justice reform
        Courts, sentencing and tribunals
        Criminal justice reform
        Family justice system

  


  

  


    
  


    