
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Data scientist
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what a data scientist does and the skills you need to do the job.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
      Last updated
      
        25 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of data scientist

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Data Scientists in government may work in the Digital, Data and Technology function or the Analysis function. We are developing a single common job model for all data scientists. This means the role is the same whether you belong to the DDaT function or the Analytics function.


We are updating the Data Science role. This page will be updated with a full description of the role by Autumn 2021. This page has an up to date introduction to the role and summary of the role responsibilities.

There is more information about the role of a data scientist in government and the most up to date job model on the  Government Analyst Career Framework.

Introduction to the role of data scientist

A Data Scientist uses data to identify and solve complex business problems. They have an interdisciplinary focus, using techniques and knowledge from a range of scientific and computer science disciplines (for example, statistics, analytics, machine learning).

A Data scientist is open and transparent, collaborating with others to share good practice and continuously improve outputs. In this role, as part of a multidisciplinary team, you will work with data architects, data engineers, data analysts and others.

Your role responsibilities as a data scientist may include:


  building credible statistical models from data and using the best coding practices to generate reproducible work
  sourcing, accessing, manipulating and engineering data processes with data that typically have characteristics of volume, velocity and variety, or all of them
  exploring and visualising data to present the ‘story’ of data in a meaningful way to a range of technical and non-technical audiences
  using an evolving range of data analysis tools and techniques, including open source, some of which must be learnt quickly, as and when required
  working with policy and operations to understand where data science can add value
  supporting strategic and operational decision making in order to create impact
  drawing on other technical and analytical standards from across government and industry
  adhering to the data science ethics framework
  taking an interdisciplinary focus, using techniques and knowledge from across the scientific spectrum
  continuously seeking to expand a range of technical skills in addition to their leadership and communications development
  helping to grow data science skills in other teams, understanding the variety of functional roles relating to data science and how they can be most effectively applied to solve business problems


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs
  Read about the government’s data science community
  Blog: building capability and community through the Government Data Science Partnership
  Blog: Chiin-Rui Tan, Head of Data Science at Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO)





      
        
    Published 7 January 2020
    Last updated 25 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              25 February 2021
              We are updating the Data Science role. This page will be updated with a full description of the role by Autumn 2021. This page has an up to date introduction to the role and summary of the role responsibilities. 

There is more information about the role of a data scientist in government and the most up to date job model on the [Government Analyst Career Framework](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/analysis-function-career-framework).
            
            
              7 January 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Government Analysis Function SCS Capability Framework
        Government Analysis Career Framework
        Programme delivery manager
        Data analyst
        Service transition manager

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    