
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Subject knowledge enhancement: an introduction
  

  
  
  
      
  Information about subject knowledge enhancement (SKE) support for initial teacher training (ITT) recruitment.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      10 November 2014
      Last updated
      
        13 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          How to know if an applicant needs SKE


        
        
          Referring a participant for SKE


        
        
          How SKE programmes are provided

        
        
          
SKE funding

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This information is for initial teacher training (ITT) providers and School Direct lead schools.

If you’re an applicant to an ITT course, visit our improve your subject knowledge page on the Get into Teaching website.

You can use the subject knowledge enhancement: course directory to find a suitable provider.

Overview

The Department for Education (DfE) funds SKE programmes in:


  biology
  chemistry
  computing
  design and technology
  English
  languages
  mathematics
  primary mathematics
  physics
  religious education


As a School Direct lead school or an ITT provider you may see applicants who have the potential to become outstanding teachers but who need to increase their subject knowledge before the teachers’ standards can be met. An SKE programme can help you to feel confident that they can be recruited.

How to know if an applicant needs SKE


The need for SKE is usually identified by a school or provider during the recruitment and selection process. This could be:


  when the applicant is undertaking school experience
  during discussions with an individual before they apply
  from the application form
  during the applicant’s interview


Applicants may need more specific subject knowledge to begin an ITT course if they have:


  a degree that’s related to the subject rather than an exact match for it
  studied the subject at A level, but not degree level
  an unrelated degree but relevant professional knowledge in the subject
  studied for a languages degree, but need a second language at an acceptable level for teaching in schools
  a degree in the subject but have not used their degree knowledge for many years


Applicants who have a degree in their chosen ITT subject awarded in the previous 5 years are not eligible for a funded SKE course.

Referring a participant for SKE


The applicant’s SKE provider will ask you to complete a referral form. This is to ensure a consistent approach to collecting applicant information.

How SKE programmes are provided

SKE courses can vary in duration - from an 8-week refresher or booster programme through to a 28-week programme - and can be undertaken on a full-time or part-time basis.

All SKE programmes must be completed before qualified teacher status can be recommended and awarded.

There is no restriction on the type of provider that can deliver SKE, and the applicant has the final decision about their provider. However, SKE providers must have a framework agreement in place with the department to deliver SKE.

SKE courses can be:


  completed before or alongside ITT courses
  offered online, through distance learning, face-to-face or a mixture of these approaches



SKE for additional languages

If an applicant for ITT specialising in languages is already adept in a language other than English, you can use our SKE funding to refresh their skills in any additional language. This includes modern foreign languages, community languages, Latin and Ancient Greek.

Through the selection process you should:


  identify applicants who will benefit from an SKE programme
  concentrate on their level of existing and previous language knowledge
  make their offer of teacher training conditional on undertaking a language SKE



SKE programmes listed on the subject knowledge enhancement: course directory are usually for French, German and Spanish. However, you can develop and offer tailored SKE programmes in other languages to meet the needs of your applicants.


SKE funding

For all SKE courses in the 2021 to 2022 academic year:


  programme costs are funded at a unit fee up to £200 per week per participant
  the participant bursary funding is £175 per week per participant


Contact us


    Subject knowledge enhancement


    
        
          Email ske.inbox@education.gov.uk
        


    








      
        
    Published 10 November 2014
    Last updated 13 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 October 2021
              Updated following the replacement of grant funding for subject knowledge enhancement (SKE) with a multi-provider framework agreement.
            
            
              15 March 2021
              Removed information about funding for physics SKE courses being available from January 2021 and funding for all other SKE courses being available from April 2021 as this is now out of date.
            
            
              18 January 2021
              Added a link to the tender to deliver Subject knowledge enhancement (SKE).
            
            
              11 December 2020
              Removed geography from the list of covered programmes. Updated information about which applicants are eligible for SKE to begin an ITT course. Updated bursary information for the 2020 to 2021 academic year and timings of course availability.
            
            
              30 November 2020
              Added a link for further information about the opportunity in future for multiple providers to design and deliver subject knowledge enhancement (SKE) courses.
            
            
              28 September 2020
              Added an instruction not to start any candidates on 2020 to 2021 SKE courses from 1 October 2020.
            
            
              30 March 2020
              Added updated information about the the funding arrangements for SKE courses, in response to the implications of coronavirus (COVID-19).
            
            
              25 February 2020
              Added information about changes to the commercial model for the SKE programme, starting in the 2020 to 2021 academic year, including how to apply through the tender process to deliver DfE-funded SKE courses from October 2020 onwards.
            
            
              22 October 2018
              Added religious education to the list of covered programmes. Change to text relating to SKE funding. Removed link to the SKE operations manual and added details of how to request a copy.
            
            
              2 September 2015
              New funding rates for the academic year 2015 to 2016
            
            
              27 July 2015
              Read new information on SKE for the academic year 2015 to 2016.
            
            
              15 July 2015
              Added contact details
            
            
              10 November 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Subject knowledge enhancement (SKE) course form
        Teacher subject specialism training (TSST): programme details
        Subject knowledge enhancement (SKE): course directory
        Funding: initial teacher training (ITT)
        School Direct (salaried): funding manual

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Initial Teacher Training (ITT)

  


  

  


    
  


    