
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 3: sponsor duties and compliance
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for sponsors on sponsor duties and compliance.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Visas and Immigration

      
      Published
      9 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        1 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 3: sponsor duties and compliance (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 3: sponsor duties and compliance
    
        PDF, 541KB, 65 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Guidance for organisations who hold a sponsor licence under the Worker and Temporary Worker routes of the immigration system.

It tells you how to meet your sponsor duties and the action we will take if you breach, or are suspected of breaching, these duties.



        
      

      
    Published 9 December 2020
    Last updated 1 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 November 2021
              Updated Annex C1 to include reference to seasonal workers sponsored in the pork butchery sector.
            
            
              11 October 2021
              Guidance updated to reflect introduction of new International Sportsperson and Creative Worker routes, rebranding of other T5 (Temporary Worker) routes, and temporary changes to the Seasonal Worker route.
            
            
              21 May 2021
              Updated guidance with various changes, including information to advise sponsors of their duties in relation to the ATAS requirement, which comes into force on 21 May 2021.
            
            
              5 May 2021
              Added accessible version.
            
            
              9 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Workers and Temporary Workers - guidance for sponsors part 1: apply for a licence
        Sponsor guidance appendix D: keeping records for sponsorship
        Creating and assigning a CoS: SMS guide 8
        Creating a CoS: guide for business sponsors (SMS guide 8a)
        Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 2: sponsor a worker

  




      

    Collection

  


        Sponsorship: guidance for employers and educators

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Entering and staying in the UK

  


  

  


    
  


    