
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Assurance of AI and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
  

  
  

  
    
  A simple guide to understanding and describing the trustworthiness of autonomous systems and associated artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      12 October 2021
      Last updated
      
        1 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Assurance of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Assurance of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
    
        PDF, 7.26 MB, 34 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email centralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guide has been written by the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) to help the people we work with think about how we assure AI and autonomous systems. We work with our partners and suppliers to deliver research on AI and autonomy, and aim to understand how we can responsibly and safely apply these techniques to a wide range of defence and security challenges.

This guide explains how we work out how confident we are about the safety and trustworthiness of a system or algorithm, and how we describe and communicate our findings.

It is one of a series of biscuit books, designed to be dipped into and easily digested - just like a biscuit with tea.



        
      

      
    Published 12 October 2021
    Last updated 1 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 December 2021
              Added PDF version.
            
            
              12 October 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
        AI, Data Science and Machine Learning: a Dstl biscuit book
        Building Blocks for AI and Autonomy: a Dstl biscuit book
        Dstl biscuit books
        AI and data science: defence science and technology capability

  




      

    Collection

  


        Dstl biscuit books

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Scientific research and development
        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    