
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Forensic gait analysis: code of practice
  

  
  

  
    
  Code of practice produced by the Chartered Society of Forensic Sciences' Forensic Gait Analysis Working Group in collaboration with the College of Podiatry.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Forensic Science Regulator

      
      Published
      12 December 2019
      Last updated
      
        22 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Code of practice for forensic gait analysis
    
        PDF, 460KB, 48 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This document aims to ensure that forensic units undertaking forensic gait analysis casework will meet the relevant key requirements taken from the regulator’s codes of practice and conduct for forensic science providers and practitioners in the criminal justice system.

You can read the the Forensic Science Regulator consultation on the draft code of practice for forensic gait analysis.



        
      

      
    Published 12 December 2019
    Last updated 22 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 September 2020
              Updated guidance.
            
            
              12 December 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Cattle without passports
        Changes to the Corporation Tax exit charges
        Equine infectious anaemia in Germany
        Haiti: funeral directors
        Elizabeth Truss speech on the environment and the rural economy

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law

  


  

  


    
  


    