Physical science educators looking for new ideas to better engage their elementary or middle school students, whether in the digital or traditional classroom, need look no further. The U.S. Department of Energy's Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility is now accepting applications for its 2020-21 science enrichment program for fifth-, sixth- and eighth-grade teachers of science. The deadline for applications is Sept. 4, 2020.The Jefferson Lab Science Activities for Teachers program is designed to increase teachers' knowledge of the physical sciences and to strengthen their teaching skills. This year, the program has been revamped to a remote format, and it will begin with a focus on the vital skills needed to engage students via the digital classroom. “We’re meeting an immediate need by delivering the program remotely,” said Lisa Surles-Law, Science Education team lead at Jefferson Lab. “Supporting teachers doesn't have to stop because there is limited site access.”Surles-Law says that the program also includes more downloadable activities and videos, a social distancing plan for distributing activity supplies, and increased program flexibility to address teachers’ changing needs in these challenging times. The JSAT after-school program is open to elementary and middle school teachers employed full time in public, private or parochial schools and whose major teaching assignment includes science. The program extends September through May and will encompass a wide range of topics, including: matter, energy transfer, force and motion, magnetism and electricity, atomic structure, waves and sound, simple machines, watershed and optics.The JSAT program addresses components of the National Science Education Standards and the Virginia Standards of Learning. Participating teachers can earn a stipend and up to 48 recertification points for 2020-21.Additional information about the program and the application form is available at: .Questions about the program may be directed to Surles-Law at . The application deadline for the 2020-21 program is Friday, Sept. 4, 2020.The JSAT program is funded by a grant from the Jefferson Science Associates Initiatives Fund. The JSA Initiatives Fund Program was established to support programs, initiatives and activities that further the scientific outreach, and promote the science, education and technology missions of Jefferson Lab in ways that complement its basic and applied research focus. Initiatives Fund awards are for those projects that benefit the lab user community and that leverage commitments of others. Information about the JSA Initiatives Fund is online at: .Contact: Kandice Carter, Jefferson Lab Communications Office, 757-269-7263, 