
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Behaviour hubs
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out how the behaviour hubs programme helps schools improve their behaviour culture by working with exemplary schools. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      28 February 2020
      Last updated
      
        4 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Apply

        
        
          Overview

        
        
          Criteria

        
        
          The partner school support offer

        
        
          The role of lead schools and MATs


        
        
          List of current lead schools and MATs


        
        
          Who is supporting the programme

        
        
          Contact

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Apply

Prospective partner schools and multi-academy trusts MATs can apply to the behaviour hubs programme at any time. New cohorts start at the beginning of each term so schools do not need to wait until the start of the academic year.


Use this application form to apply to become a partner school or MAT.


Please note that we are not accepting applications for new lead schools at this time.

Overview

The Department for Education (DfE) is funding a 3-year programme to improve pupil behaviour.

The programme pairs schools and MATs with exemplary behaviour practices, called lead schools or MATs, with partner schools or MATs who want and need to improve pupil behaviour.

The programme is flexible with a tailored offer of support depending on partner schools’ circumstances but all partner schools can expect to get support with:


  diagnosing specific areas of improvement
  designing and developing new approaches to addressing poor behaviour
  developing clear, sustainable behaviour cultures for all pupils


The programme is based on creating a culture: how school leaders can optimise behaviour. Good behaviour, routines and structures in schools support all pupils’ engagement in education, and their mental health and wellbeing. Schools will work together to apply these principles to the individual context of the school.

Download the behaviour hubs programme brochure for an overview of support available.

Criteria

Partner school and MAT criteria

The following partner schools can apply:


  primary schools
  secondary schools
  alternative provision schools
  special schools
  MATs


To be a partner school you must be rated ‘good’, ‘requires improvement’ or ‘inadequate’ by Ofsted. Applications are currently being accepted from schools of all provisions across England.

To be a partner MAT you should have at least one secondary school within your trust rated ‘good’, ‘requires improvement’ or ‘inadequate’ by Ofsted.

Partner schools will need to allocate around 20 to 30 days of engagement to the programme. This can be spread out among school staff including senior leaders.

Lead and partner schools on the programme will be expected to work with each other for one year but schools may be able to work together for 2 years if it is required after completion of the first year.

The partner school support offer


There are 5 parts to the support offer that partner schools receive through the behaviour hubs programme.


  One-to-one support
  Training
  Open days
  Networking events
  Resources



1. One-to-one support

There are 3 possible streams.

Core support

This offer is for schools who want to work more independently. As a partner school, you will have access to:


  an action planning session with the lead school to identify areas for change and establish a plan to implement and monitor that change
  ongoing engagement with your lead school through hub networking events
  a follow up meeting with the lead school in the third term to review progress and provide further advice


In total, partner schools under the core offer will be expected to dedicate 12 to 20 days to the programme and will receive £3,000 at the end of the programme to contribute to staff time and expenses.

Extended support

This offer is for schools who want more one-to-one support. The partner school will have access to 8 to 12 days of in-depth support from their lead school to:


  co-diagnose key behaviour issues through site visits and data sharing.
  identify areas for change and support to develop and implement an action plan, that will set out how to quickly improve and embed a whole school approach to behaviour management, including how to monitor the impact
  co-deliver whole-school training to support the launch of new behaviour policies,
  provide ongoing support, mentoring, coaching and monitoring to support leaders in implementing lasting change


In total, partner schools under the extended offer will be expected to dedicate 20 to 40 days to the programme and will receive £9,000 at the end of the programme to contribute to staff time and expenses.

Multi-school support

This offer is for multi-academy trusts who would like to implement change across several schools within the trust. The partner MAT will have access to 5 to 7 days of in-depth support from the lead MAT exec team to:


  co-diagnose key behaviour issues through site visits and data sharing and identify areas for change
  consider, develop and implement a MAT-wide approach to behaviour management across their schools to create a sustained cultural change throughout the trust, including how to monitor impact
  provide ongoing one-to-one support, mentoring, coaching and monitoring to support leaders in implementing lasting change


In total, partner MATs under the multi-school offer will be expected to dedicate 22 to 30 days to the programme and will receive £6,000 at the end of the programme to contribute to staff time and expenses. In addition, they will receive extended support for a ‘requires improvement’ school within the partner MAT.

2. Training

All partner schools, regardless of their support stream, will have access to training on specific issues, common problems and effective approaches led by expert advisers, that can be implemented in their school context. Training modules have been developed and reviewed by experts from across the school sector. The training includes:


  induction training, providing an overview of the programme and its principles
  specialist modules on the different challenges faced when managing behaviour in alternative provision, special schools and MATs

  essential mandatory modules on leadership and management, creating systems and social norms, consequences, including sanctions and rewards, and SEND which covers how to ensure behaviour policies and practices are inclusive
  additional modules on data monitoring and accountability, attendance and punctuality, high challenge behaviour in mainstream settings and using alternative provision effectively


3. Open days

Lead schools will hold open days 3 times a year. These days will be opportunities for partner schools and MATs to observe good systems and approaches in action, as well as reflect on any common themes and challenges.

4. Networking events

Hub networking events will take place once every term. Lead and partner schools and MATs will come together to share experiences and good practice. There will also be online forums to share learning hosted on the behaviour hubs portal.

5. Resources

Online resources developed by the expert advisers will be available for partner schools and MATs to equip and empower schools to implement changes in their settings. These will include programme handbooks, behaviour audit tools and good practice examples.

Schools will have access to the behaviour hubs portal, where they can book onto events, access resources and training materials and contribute to forums for school-to-school advice and support.

The role of lead schools and MATs


Lead schools and MATs provide tailored one-to-one support to a number of partner schools or MATs in their area, helping them to implement lasting whole school culture changes. They will be able to respond to the specific challenges that a partner school is facing, including those relating to special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) or mental health issues, and their context.

A lead school will be comprised of a team of inspirational senior leaders with proven experience in implementing successful behaviour cultures within their schools. A lead MAT will have experienced executives that are able to support the development of effective trust-wide approaches to managing behaviour.

Lead schools and MATs will be required to dedicate approximately 30 to 50 days of senior and middle leadership time per academic year to support their partner schools or MATs and will receive financial reimbursement for the work they do. They will be guided by a team of behaviour advisers led by Tom Bennett who oversees the behaviour hubs programme.

List of current lead schools and MATs


Lead schools and MATs are from across the school sector including primary, secondary, alternative provision, special and MATs. This provides partner schools and MATs with access to good practice across different types of provision, including specialist provision.

MAT hubs


  Maiden Erlegh Trust and Maiden Erlegh School, Wokingham
  Dixons Academy Trust and Dixons Trinity Academy, Bradford


Secondary hubs


  Bedford Free School, Advantage Schools, Bedford
  Saint Augustine’s Catholic High School, Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Multi-Academy Company, Worcestershire
  Ashmole Academy, Ashmole Academy Trust Ltd, Barnet
  Painsley Catholic College, The Painsley Catholic Academy, Staffordshire
  St Gregory’s Catholic Science College, All Saints’ Trust, Brent
  Carmel College, Bishop Hogarth Catholic Education Trust, Darlington
  Sedgefield Community College, The Laidlaw Schools Trust, Durham
  Glenmoor Academy, United Learning Trust, Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole


Primary hubs


  Evelyn Street Community Primary School, Warrington Primary Academy Trust, Warrington
  Charles Dickens Primary School, The Charter Schools Educational Trust, Southwark
  Lyons Hall Primary School, Learning Pathways Academy, Essex
  Chepping View Primary Academy, Inspiring Futures Partnership Trust, Buckinghamshire
  Polegate School, East Sussex
  Throckley Primary School, Outer West Learning Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne
  Witham St Hughs Academy, L.E.A.D Academy Trust, Lincolnshire Local Authority


Alternative provision hubs


  The Limes College, Alternative Learning Trust, Sutton
  Perryfields Primary PRU, Worcestershire


Special school hubs


  Tor View School, The Sea View Trust, Lancashire
  Keyham Lodge School, Leicester City
  Oak Bank School, Oak Bank School, Central Bedfordshire


Who is supporting the programme

Behaviour advisers

A team of behaviour advisers, led by Tom Bennett, will oversee the programme, deliver training and help support schools. The behaviour advisers bring experience from across the school sectors, including alternative provision and special schools, providing broad representation of all schools and their specific needs.

The current behaviour advisers are:


  Tom Bennett, author of creating a culture: how school leaders can optimise behaviour and founder of researchED
  Michelle Blanchard, Head of Junior Fulneck School. Former Executive Principal at Dixons Academy Trust and Principal of Dixons Music Primary in Bradford
  John D’Abbro, founder of Dabbs Education ltd and former Head of the New Rush Hall Group
  Mark Emmerson, Chief Executive Officer of City of London Academy Trust in London and formerly Principal of Stoke Newington School, The City Academy, Hackney and City of London Academy Islington
  Marie Gentles, co-director of Magic Behaviour Management and former Principal of Hawkswood AP Primary in London
  Jayne Lowe, Director of Bright Green Learning, education adviser, former PRU headteacher and currently supporting Ministry of Justice on ‘Transforming Youth Custody’
  Jenny Thompson, Principal of Dixons Trinity Academy in Bradford


Delivery centre

Education Development Trust (EDT) has been appointed to:


  manage the delivery of the programme
  provide logistical and administrative support, including grant management, organising training, collecting monitoring information
  be the central point of contact for lead schools, partner schools and the general public


Contact

For any queries relating to behaviour hubs, to find out more about the programme or to enquire about participation, email behaviourhubs@educationdevelopmenttrust.com.





      
        
    Published 28 February 2020
    Last updated 4 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              4 November 2021
              Updated to reflect the closing of the lead school and MAT application window.
            
            
              5 October 2021
              Updated to extend the application date deadline to become a lead school or MAT to midnight on 31 October 2021.
            
            
              6 September 2021
              We are now accepting applications for new lead schools and multi-academy trusts (MATs) to join the behaviour hubs programme. We have added a link to the application form and application guidance. We have also added more information about the lead school and MAT criteria and the role of lead schools and MATs.
            
            
              29 June 2021
              Removed application deadline.
            
            
              13 May 2021
              Clarified the aims of the programme. Added new guidance on what support is available and a list of current lead schools and hubs.
            
            
              25 March 2021
              Provided information about the next cohort in the 'Apply' section.
            
            
              2 March 2021
              Updated programme information and information on how partner schools can apply.
            
            
              30 October 2020
              Removed application information - the application has now closed.
            
            
              14 September 2020
              Reformatted guidance and re-added details on how prospective lead schools and MATs can apply.
            
            
              23 June 2020
              Updated the programme start date.
            
            
              17 March 2020
              Included a link to a previously published guidance document to clarify how users can apply.
            
            
              28 February 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Whole school approach: managing poor behaviour
        Creating a culture: a review of behaviour management in schools
        Using rewards: encouraging good behaviour
        Michael Gove speaks about securing our children’s future
        School behaviour management case studies report

  




      

    Collection

  


        School improvement support

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Pupil wellbeing, behaviour and attendance
        School-to-school support

  


  

  


    
  


    