
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Buying and selling on the Digital Marketplace
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance for buyers and suppliers of cloud technology, digital outcomes, digital specialists, user research participants and labs.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Digital Service and Crown Commercial Service

      
      Published
      27 June 2019
      Last updated
      
        17 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Services and frameworks on the Digital Marketplace

        
        
          Sell services on the Digital Marketplace

        
        
          Buy services through the Digital Marketplace

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Digital Marketplace is an online service for public sector organisations to find people and technology for digital projects.

Suppliers must apply to sell services. Any public sector organisation, including agencies and arm’s length bodies, can buy using the Digital Marketplace.

Services and frameworks on the Digital Marketplace

Frameworks are agreements between the government and suppliers to supply certain types of services under specific terms.

Buyers and suppliers still need to sign a contract (a ‘call-off contract’) for each service bought through a framework.

These services are on the Digital Marketplace:


  cloud software and services (the G-Cloud framework)
  digital outcomes, digital specialists and user research services (the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework)
  physical data centre space (the Crown Hosting Data Centres framework)



Suppliers cannot apply to join the Crown Hosting Data Centres framework.


Sell services on the Digital Marketplace

The process is different for each framework.

To find out more, read the:


  G-Cloud suppliers’ guide
  Digital Outcomes and Specialists suppliers’ guide


You can only apply when an Official Journal of the European Union (OJEU) contract notice has been issued. At this point, suppliers will have 4 to 6 weeks to apply to the framework.

On average, a contract notice will be issued every:


  9 to 18 months for Digital Outcomes and Specialists
  12 months for G-Cloud


Sign up for emails about when you can apply and for updates on frameworks.

Buy services through the Digital Marketplace

Any public sector organisation, including agencies and arm’s length bodies, can buy using the Digital Marketplace.

You can create an account and buy at any time.

The buying process is different depending on what services you’re buying.

Read the guidance for more information:


  G-Cloud buyers’ guide
  Digital Outcomes and Specialists buyers’ guide
  Crown Hosting Data Centres framework guide


Working out what services you need

Working with both procurement and technical professionals can help you decide on the high-level requirements and how long your project will take.

You should consider:


  the funds you have available to buy the services
  the technical and procurement requirements of the project
  the selection criteria on which your choice will be based


Identify what the ‘must-have’ requirements are and what the ‘wants’ are. Read the government’s Service Design Manual to help you describe your needs.

Getting funding approval

The Government Digital Service (GDS) manages central government’s digital and IT spend controls.

This means that all funding requests for new or redesigned digital services need formal approval by GDS before they can go ahead. You’ll also need to have approval from within your organisation.

You must make your decision-making process auditable when you buy services on the Digital Marketplace.





      
        
    Published 27 June 2019
    Last updated 17 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 November 2020
              Updated: Applications for Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5 are now closed.
            
            
              10 November 2020
              Updated closing date to Tuesday 17 November 2020
            
            
              9 October 2020
              Applications for Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5 are now open
            
            
              20 July 2020
              Updated to show G-Cloud 12 is closed for applications.
            
            
              27 March 2020
              Changing application closing data.
            
            
              3 March 2020
              Applications for G-Cloud 12 are open and close on 22 April 2020.
            
            
              18 February 2020
              Updated to add G-Cloud 12 application date
            
            
              27 June 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Buying services on the Digital Marketplace
        What to do and when for G-Cloud 12
        How Digital Marketplace suppliers have been evaluated
        Talking to suppliers before you buy Digital Marketplace services

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    