
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Unfogging the Future: a Dstl biscuit book
  

  
  

  
    
  An introduction to thinking about the future: the benefits, key futures concepts, and some of the pitfalls. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      29 September 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Unfogging the Future: a Dstl biscuit book
    
        PDF, 4.5MB, 54 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email centralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Unfogging the Future: a Dstl biscuit book
    
        ODT, 1.98MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email centralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The government has made a commitment to making the UK a great science power. Dstl is supporting that ambition by changing its approach and structure to focus on identifying and developing generation-after-next-technology. Guided by the Ministry of Defence Science and Technology Strategy we will help shape the future of UK defence and security. To do this we will need to explore what the future might look like, grapple with complexity and uncertainty and be ready to exploit the opportunities the future might hold.

This guide is an opportunity for you to learn more about the future and how you might incorporate it in your work. If we anticipate the future we are much more likely to take action and make decisions today that will really stand the test of time.

Unfogging the Future is one of a series of biscuit books written by experts at Dstl, designed to be dipped into and easily digested - just like a biscuit with tea.



        
      

      
    Published 29 September 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Dstl biscuit books
        Assurance of AI and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
        AI, Data Science and Machine Learning: a Dstl biscuit book
        Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
        Building Blocks for AI and Autonomy: a Dstl biscuit book

  




      

    Collection

  


        Dstl biscuit books

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Scientific research and development
        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    