
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19): advice for people in England with animals
  

  
  
  
      
  Advice for pet owners, livestock and animal keepers on looking after the welfare of animals and people during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. This advice applies to England only.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Animal and Plant Health Agency

      
      Published
      27 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        16 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England

                Guidance for Wales
          Guidance for Scotland
          Guidance for Northern Ireland


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How COVID-19 affects animals

        
        
          If you own a ferret

        
        
          If you need to take your animal to the vet

        
        
          If you’re self-isolating

        
        
          Working with animals

        
        
          Contact

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

England has moved to Plan B in response to the risks of the Omicron variant. Find out what you must do to help prevent the spread.


How COVID-19 affects animals

Animals can catch SARS-CoV-2. This is the virus that causes COVID-19. It is rare, and they may show only mild clinical signs and recover within a few days.
There is evidence that the following species can catch the virus that causes COVID-19:


  big cats in captivity
  coatimundi
  domestic cats
  dogs
  ferrets
  fruit bats
  hyenas
  mink
  non-human primates
  pangolins
  pigs (these are less prone to catching COVID-19)
  raccoon dogs
  rodents
  white-tailed deer


Mink and other mammals in the mustelinae family, such as ferrets, can also catch new variants of the virus and spread these between their own species.

There is limited evidence to suggest that COVID-19 could pass:


  from infected humans to the listed animals after close contact or sharing their equipment or airspace
  from mink to mink kept in captivity and then transfer to humans
  between animals infected by experimental testing, such as raccoon dogs, white-tailed deer and mice
  between ferrets infected by experimental testing and then transfer to humans


Animal fur can act as a carrier (fomite transmission) for the COVID-19 virus for short periods of time, in the same way as other surfaces. There have been no recorded cases of airborne transmission between animals and humans.

Pets

In line with public health guidance, you should:


  wash your hands before and after any contact with your pet, its food or bedding – avoid hand sanitisers or wipes that may be harmful to animals
  not share food, food bowls or utensils with your pet


There is no evidence that you need to wash your pets to control the spread of COVID-19. You should only wash your pets in the usual way and use products on them that are approved for use on animals.

If you’re concerned about your pet because it has respiratory or digestive problems and a temperature, you should contact your vet who will decide if it needs to be tested.

If you’re travelling to the UK with your dog, cat or ferret, find out how to care for your pet while you’re in quarantine.

If you own a ferret

You should isolate your ferret for 21 days if:


  you or your household are self-isolating
  you’ve brought your ferret to England from outside the Common Travel Area (UK, Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man)



Isolation means you should prevent contact between your ferret and ferrets or people from other households.

Register your ferret or other mustelinae

If you’re a keeper in England or Wales, you should register your ferret or other mustelinae on the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) register.

You should follow separate guidance if you’re in Scotland.

A keeper of ferrets or other mustelinae is someone who takes care of them on a daily basis at work or as pets at home.

Other mustelinae include:


  polecats
  stoats
  mink
  hybrids of these animals


Registration is voluntary. The register provides information on how to reduce the risk of you or your animal catching COVID-19. You’ll get alerts if there is a COVID-19 outbreak among ferrets or other mustelinae.

Who to contact about the GB ferret register

If you have any questions about the GB ferret register, telephone:


  0800 6341112 for keepers in England or Wales
  01466 794323 for keepers in Scotland


If you need to take your animal to the vet
You must wear a face covering in premises providing veterinary services. Read guidance on making and wearing a face covering.

If you’re self-isolating

This advice applies to all animal keepers.

If you develop symptoms of COVID-19, test positive or live with someone who has or might have COVID-19, follow guidance for households with possible or confirmed coronavirus (COVID-19) infection.

If you have been in contact with someone who might have COVID-19, but does not live in your household, check if you need to self-isolate.

Check if you can get financial support through the Test and Trace Support Payment scheme. All local authorities can also give you advice.

If you have arrived in the UK from overseas you may also need to self-isolate.

Avoid contact with animals

If you’re self-isolating, you should not:


  kiss or cuddle an animal
  share food, food bowls or utensils
  share bedding


You should follow the COVID-19 cleaning guide to clean animal bedding and other items, such as leads or feeding bowls.

You should make a plan for the care and welfare of animals in your care, in case you need to self-isolate. You should arrange for someone else who is not self-isolating or use professional services to care for your animals.
You should notify anyone caring for your animals on your behalf in advance that you’re self-isolating and arrange a no-contact service where possible.

If there is no one to help, you should contact your vet or yard manager. Recognised trade bodies or associations may also be able to support you.

Veterinary care

If an animal in your care needs emergency veterinary care while you’re self-isolating, you can arrange to have it taken to the vet, or take it to the vet yourself where necessary. You should only do this if it is not possible for another person to take your animal to the vet. You should tell the vet in advance that you’re self-isolating.

Exercising your animal

If your animal cannot be exercised at home, you should ask someone outside of your household or support bubble to exercise your animal for you, or access exercising services provided by a professional.
If you are exercising an animal on behalf of someone who is self-isolating, you should wash your hands before and after contact with it.

Working with animals

Follow the guidance for working safely during coronavirus (COVID-19).

As an employer, you should:


  complete a health and safety risk assessment that includes risks from COVID-19 and take into account any reasonable adjustments for staff and customers with disabilities
  share the  assessment with your staff


Follow the guidance from the Health and Safety Executive on how to do a risk assessment during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

Your risk assessment for any activity in the workplace should also consider the risk of anyone coming into contact with animals, particularly those susceptible to COVID-19. This includes visitors coming to an event.

You must encourage visitors to wear a face covering, for example by putting up signs.

You should:


  minimise contact with animals – such as petting or handling by the general public
  prevent people with COVID-19 symptoms, or those self-isolating, from coming into contact with these animals
  ask staff or visitors to wash their hands before and after contact with animals, their food or bedding – avoid hand sanitisers or wipes that may be harmful to animals
  prevent staff or visitors from breathing, coughing or sneezing on an animal
  warn staff or visitors not to allow an animal to lick them


More information on COVID-19 and animals is available on third party websites. The advice may not be accessible to assistive technology:


  
Covid-19 guidance for zoos and aquariums published by the British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums (BIAZA)
  
Guidance on working with farmed animals of species susceptible to infection published by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE)
  
Coronavirus advice for animal owners published by the British Veterinary Association (BVA)
  
Advice for veterinary services published by the BVA



Contact

If you have any queries, email the APHA Customer Advice team customeradvice@apha.gov.uk.

For commercial transporter enquiries, email the APHA Welfare in Transport team WIT@apha.gov.uk.





      
        
    Published 27 March 2020
    Last updated 16 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 December 2021
              Updated with guidance on wearing a face covering.
            
            
              8 October 2021
              Updated the 'If you own a ferret' section to remove references to red and amber list travel rules.
            
            
              20 July 2021
              Updated the guidance with what you need to do from 19 July.
            
            
              18 May 2021
              Updated with what you can and cannot do from 17 May.
            
            
              13 April 2021
              Updated with what you can and cannot do from 12 April.
            
            
              29 March 2021
              Updated with what you can and cannot do from 29 March.
            
            
              9 March 2021
              Updated guidance with new rules that apply from 8 March.
            
            
              19 February 2021
              Added guidance about contacting your vet if your pet has respiratory or digestive problems and a temperature.
            
            
              13 January 2021
              Updated guidance following the 4 January announcement of a national lockdown.
            
            
              29 December 2020
              Updated with guidance on rules in Tier 4.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated with guidance from 2 December 2020.
            
            
              4 November 2020
              Updated with guidance on caring for animals during lockdown.
            
            
              12 October 2020
              Updated with a link to local COVID-19 alert levels.
            
            
              14 August 2020
              Updated with guidance on caring for animals if you're returning from abroad and need to quarantine.
            
            
              27 July 2020
              Updated with information about a confirmed case of COVID-19 in a cat in England.
            
            
              18 May 2020
              Updated guidance for people in England with pets or livestock.
            
            
              31 March 2020
              Updated the section under horse, livestock and other animals to clarify that you should contact your local authority if you're too ill to look after animals.
            
            
              27 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): surveying and mitigation works affecting wildlife
        COVID-19: cleaning of non-healthcare settings outside the home
        Bovine TB control: licence to take and mark badgers to enable vaccination
        Ferret and other mustelinae register
        Cage-trap and mark badgers to enable vaccination to prevent the spread of bovine TB

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Coronavirus: how to stay safe and help prevent the spread and COVID-19 Response - Spring 2021 (Roadmap)
        
      
  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Animal welfare
        Pets

  


  

  


    
  


    