
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Content strategist
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what a content strategist does and the skills you need to do the job.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of content strategist

        
        
          Content strategist

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This describes the role of a content strategist and the skills required, including:


  an introduction to the role, telling you what you would do in this role and the full list of skills
  a description of the specific role, specifying the skills you need and the corresponding skill level (awareness, working, practitioner, expert)


This role is part of the Digital, Data and Technology Profession in the Civil Service.

Introduction to the role of content strategist

A content strategist takes an overview of content and how it is produced. In this role, you:


  design governance, workflows, and taxonomies in a user-centred context
  work with senior stakeholders, user researchers and content, service and interaction designers


Skills required to be a content strategist

You will need the following skills for this role, although the level of expertise for each will vary, depending on the role level.


  
Agile working. You know about agile methodology and can apply an agile mindset to all aspects of your work. You can work in a fast-paced, evolving environment and use an iterative method and flexible approach to enable rapid delivery. You are unafraid to take risks, willing to learn from mistakes and appreciate the importance of agile project delivery for digital projects in government. You can ensure the team knows what each other is working on and how this relates to practical government objectives and user needs.
  
Prototyping. You can apply technical knowledge and experience to create or design workable prototypes, both programs and physical outputs. You understand parameters, restrictions and synergies.
  
Stakeholder relationship management. You know how to identify, analyse, manage and monitor relationships with and between stakeholders. You can communicate with stakeholders clearly and regularly, clarifying mutual needs and commitments through consultation and consideration of impacts while focusing on user needs. For example, you know how to manage customer and supplier relationships, ensuring that recommendations deliver maximum benefit and facilitating workshops with stakeholders.
  
Strategic thinking. You can take an overall perspective on business issues, events, activities and discuss their wider implications and long-term impact. This could include determining patterns, standards, policies, roadmaps and vision statements. You know how to focus on outcomes rather than solutions and activities.
  
User focus. You understand users and can identify who they are and what their needs are, based on evidence. You can translate user stories and propose design approaches or services to meet these needs. You can engage in meaningful interactions and relationships with users.You put users first and can manage competing priorities.
  
User-centred content design. You can design content to meet user needs and make complex language and processes easy to understand. You can understand and implement style and standards.


Content strategist

A content strategist is an expert practitioner in content strategy and taxonomy design. In this role, you:


  develop governance, processes and workflows based on delivering strategy and policy intent
  manage relationships and interdependencies with other content roles
  shape and structure the architecture of content based on user-centred design principles
  work with lead content designers to organise and manage teams to deliver outcomes


Skills needed for this role


  
Agile working. You can identify and compare the best processes or delivery methods to use, including measuring and evaluating outcomes. You know how to help the team to decide the best approach. You can help teams to manage and visualise outcomes, prioritise work and work to agreed minimum viable product (MVP), print and scope. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Prototyping. You know when to use a specific prototyping technique or method. You can show the value of prototyping to the team. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Stakeholder relationship management. You know how to direct the strategic approach for stakeholder relationships, establishing and promoting the meeting of stakeholder objectives. You can influence important senior stakeholders and provide an arbitration function. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Strategic thinking. You can lead the design and implementation of strategy, directing the evaluation of strategies and policies to ensure business requirements are being met. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
User focus. You know how to give direction on which tools or methods to use. You are experienced in meeting the needs of users across a variety of channels. You can bring insight and expertise in how user needs have changed over time to ensure these are met by the business. You know how to apply strategic thinking in how to provide the best service for the end user. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
User-centred content design. You can create and iterate content for end-to-end services. You can deliver through others and direct their work. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs





      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Technical architect
        Test engineer
        End user computing engineer
        Programme delivery manager
        Quality Assurance Testing (QAT) analyst

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    