
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Access Consortium
  

  
  
  
      
  The MHRA is part of the Access Consortium along with the Therapeutic Goods Administration, Health Canada, Health Sciences Authority of Singapore and Swissmedic. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency

      
      Published
      10 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        22 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Access heads of agencies

        
        
          Access Strategic Plan 2021-2024

        
        
          Access working groups

        
        
          Work Sharing Procedures

        
        
          Additional information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The consortium is a medium-sized coalition of regulatory authorities that work together to promote greater regulatory collaboration and alignment of regulatory requirements.

The original consortium, formed in 2007 and known as ‘ACSS’, comprised the national regulatory authorities of Australia, Canada, Singapore and Switzerland. In October 2020, the MHRA joined, and the group’s name was changed to ‘Access’. The MHRA will commence work-sharing applications with Access partners from 1 January 2021.

The consortium’s goal is to maximise international co-operation between partners in the consortium, reduce duplication, and increase each agency’s capacity to ensure patients have timely access to high quality, safe and effective therapeutic products.

The trend towards globalisation of therapeutic products industries and the rapid emergence of new technologies in the last decade accompanied with shared global challenges have created an increased need for regulatory bodies to co-operate and communicate with each other routinely. This maximises the use of up-to-date technical expertise, and ensures a consistent, contemporary approach to assessing the benefits and risks associated with the use of therapeutic products.

Access heads of agencies
The heads of the five agencies usually meet twice a year face-to-face in the margins of international meetings or conferences to review progress of the Access working groups and approve the work program for the upcoming year.

Terms of Reference (PDF, 50.9KB, 5 pages)

Access Strategic Plan 2021-2024

The Access Consortium heads of agencies have developed the Access Strategic Plan for 2021-2024. This plan will guide us toward enhanced efficiency of our national regulatory systems, while optimising synergies and alignment between regulatory authorities and reducing duplication for industry.

Access Strategic Plan 2021-2024 (PDF, 517KB, 4 pages)

Access working groups
Currently, the Access Consortium has a number of working groups in place including the:


  New Active Substances Working Group
  Generic Medicines Working Group
  Biosimilars Working Group
  Complementary Health Products Working Group
  Collaboration on International Council for Harmonization (ICH) Working Group
  IT Architecture Working Group


Access Consortium working group members have regular meetings to exchange information on regulatory issues and challenges faced by the participating regulatory agencies including issues on clinical trials, marketing authorisations, product manufacturing site inspections, post-marketing surveillance, joint development of technical guidelines or regulatory standards, and collaboration on information platforms.

Work Sharing Procedures

The Access consortium has developed 3 authorisation procedures: the New Active Substance and Biosimilar Work Sharing Initiatives and the Generic Medicine Work Sharing Initiative.

Additional information

Information regarding the Access consortium can be found:

Therapeutic Goods Administration of Australia (TGA): Access Consortium

Health Canada: Access Consortium

Swissmedic: Access Consortium

Health Science Authority: Access Consortium




      
        
    Published 10 December 2020
    Last updated 22 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 June 2021
              Addition of Access Strategic Plan 2021-2024
            
            
              10 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Access New Active Substance and Biosimilar Work Sharing Initiatives
        Access Generic Medicines Work Sharing Initiative
        Guidance on Project Orbis
        The Target Development Profile Toolkit
        Regulation 251 of the Human Medicines Regulations 2020

  




      

    Collection

  


        Licencing: how to apply

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Marketing authorisations, variations and licensing guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    