By mid-April 2021, the Russian military had amassed more than 100,000 troops at Ukraine's border. Although some have since been , the bulk of Russian forces still remain. Russia's intentions are unclear, but the menacing specter of an all-out invasion has sent tensions soaring in Kyiv and beyond.These recent events are part of a long-standing conflict in the region. Ukraine has been defending itself in an unequal struggle with Russia since 2014, when unmarked Russian troops moved in to occupy Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula. In its early phase, the conflict erupted into a hot war between Russian proxy forces and the Ukrainian military in the eastern province of Donbas. It has so far taken more than 13,000 lives.The latest troop buildup along Ukraine's border has renewed a debate about Ukrainian security that has persisted since the collapse of the Soviet Union. In April 2021, Ukraine's ambassador to Germany, Andriy Melnyk, stated that the West must step up its support for Ukraine and admit it into NATO; Ukraine's only other option would be to arm itself and maybe ""Melnyk was referring to Ukraine's decision in the early 1990s to relinquish the world's third-largest nuclear arsenal that it inherited from the Soviet Union. Its arsenal included 176 intercontinental ballistic missiles carrying 1,240 nuclear warheads, 44 strategic bombers with more than 700 nuclear-tipped cruise missiles and upward of 2,000 tactical nuclear weapons. In 1994, Ukraine joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as a non-nuclear weapon state, proceeded to transfer all nuclear warheads to Russia and dismantled all strategic delivery vehicles with U.S. technical assistance. By mid-1996, the last nuclear warhead left Ukraine's territory, and by the end of 2001, the last missile silo was demolished.Following the ambassador's controversial comments, Ukraine's foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba,  that Ukraine had no intention of violating its international obligations and that the comments were taken out of context. That might well be true. But it is also true that since 2014, Ukraine's decision to disarm has come under increased domestic scrutiny. Many in Ukraine believe it was a blunder. After Crimea was illegally annexed by Russia, a group of centrist parliamentarians  that Ukraine withdraw from the NPT. In July 2014, a right-wing faction of the Ukrainian parliament  a bill on the renewal of Ukraine's nuclear status, which presumably entailed withdrawal from the NPT and the launch of an indigenous nuclear weapons program (the bill was rejected). In the second half of 2014, popular support for Ukraine's nuclear rearmament  to almost 50 percent, up from a previous high of 33 percent in 1994....