While the COVID-19 crisis has tested organizations and people in multiple ways, employees have shown resiliency and determination, proving that they can be highly effective in virtual environments. However, flexible working models do not automatically drive inclusion or employee engagement. In fact, they can undermine those goals if not deliberately and thoughtfully addressed.Inclusion has gained importance as organizations realize its link to engagement. Employees who feel very included are  as likely to say they feel excited by and committed to their organizations than those who do not. But traditional efforts to foster diversity, equity, and inclusion (DE&I) often assume that people work together in the same physical space. The virtual or hybrid future looks and feels different. Below are a few opportunities that leaders—one of  of an employee’s experience of inclusion—can pursue.Virtual/hybrid work has had an equalizing effect for many employees. Some of the ways we are seeing this happen through our own research, as well as media reports, anecdotes, client stories, and other findings, include:A global organization with traders in Houston, London, and Singapore, for instance, has found that virtual work has helped break down geographic siloes. Pre-pandemic meetings only included those who could attend in person and thus were constrained by geography and room size. Now, in-person meetings include a virtual element, so key people can participate in the discussion regardless of physical location.However, virtual/hybrid environments can exacerbate unconscious biases and create real challenges for diverse employees. For example:To illustrate, a Black manager in a pharmaceutical company found that while working virtually allowed regular connections with teammates, informal interactions between Black colleagues in different parts of the business no longer occurred unless they were planned. Casual moments like going to lunch, walking to a meeting, or waiting for the elevator had vanished. The manager missed regularly seeing colleagues who look like him.To create inclusive and engaging virtual/hybrid working models, organizations must leverage the opportunities and manage the risks. Some ways we have seen organizations lean into this include:Virtual work doesn’t have to undermine inclusion efforts, if  is consciously embedded into  we work regardless of  we work. While reimagining the workplace, also rethink approaches to DE&I, so the new normal can be a better normal for all.