
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Seafood Fund: Fisheries Industry Science Partnerships scheme
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out how to apply for funding available through the Fisheries Industry Science Partnerships (FISP) scheme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      11 September 2021
      Last updated
      
        21 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About the UK Seafood Fund

        
        
          About the FISP scheme

        
        
          The outcome of your application

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guide is for people interested in applying for the Fisheries Industry Science Partnerships (FISP) scheme. Eligible applicants are:


  sole traders who own or operate a UK fishing boat
  organisations engaged in commercial or recreational sea fishing, aquaculture or processing in the UK
  research organisations


The FISP scheme is part of the UK Seafood Fund.

About the UK Seafood Fund

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) will manage the £100 million UK Seafood Fund to invest in the long term sustainability of the UK fisheries and seafood sector. The funding ends on 5 April 2024.

The fund’s objectives are to:


  rejuvenate the fisheries and seafood sector
  take advantage of the UK’s additional fishing quota
  bring economic growth to coastal communities


The UK Seafood Fund is divided between:


  science and innovation
  infrastructure
  skills and training


Defra will publish details of funding for infrastructure and skills and training when they are available.

About the FISP scheme

The FISP scheme will improve and share knowledge of fisheries and aquaculture by funding data collection and research to support sustainable fisheries management. This will be done through collaboration between the fishing and seafood industry and research organisations.

The FISP scheme and the existing Seafood Innovation Fund share the £24 million of funding allocated to the science and innovation part of the UK Seafood Fund.

To get funding, you must either bid for a contract or apply for a grant.

Contracts of up to £300,000 are available to carry out a full research project.

Grants of up to £20,000 are available to develop research proposals.

Apply for FISP funding

Applications for the first round closed on 22 November 2021.

Applications for the next round will open in spring 2022. The opening date will be published on this page when confirmed.

The outcome of your application

You’ll get an email with a link to BRAVO to find out if your application has been successful.

If your application is unsuccessful, you’ll get feedback to help you apply for future rounds of FISP funding.

If your bid for a full project contract is rejected, you’ll have 10 days from the date you’re notified to appeal this decision. You can make an appeal through BRAVO. If your appeal is unsuccessful, you cannot appeal again.

If your application for grant funding to develop research proposals is unsuccessful, you cannot appeal.




      
        
    Published 11 September 2021
    Last updated 21 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              21 October 2021
              Updated to show the fund is open for bids and applications. Links to BRAVO are now live for users to either bid for a contract or apply for a grant.
            
            
              22 September 2021
              Added joining instructions for MS Teams pre-engagement event on 23 September
            
            
              11 September 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        UK Seafood Fund: Seafood Innovation Fund
        Fisheries and Seafood Scheme
        Maritime and Fisheries Fund (MFF): apply for funding
        Seafood Response Fund
        Exmouth Marina dredging and disposal at Lyme Bay 2 (formerly Sprey Point)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Marine
        Funding

  


  

  


    
  


    