
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Digital presentations in court: guidance for professionals
  

  
  
  
      
  Guides and videos for prosecutors and defence lawyers on using court technology to present evidence on screens in courtrooms.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Courts & Tribunals Service, Crown Prosecution Service, and Legal Aid Agency

      
      Published
      14 March 2016
      Last updated
      
        26 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction

        
        
          Court presentations user guide

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

The Evidence Presentation System (EPS) is replacing Clickshare. Visit our guidance for how to display evidence from your laptop on courtroom monitors using EPS.


Introduction

You can use ClickShare equipment and software to present evidence in court such as CCTV footage, digital images, audio and video recordings, and maps.

For instance, you can use the system to show the court photos of injuries in sentencing and bail hearings.

Read the guides or watch the videos below to find out how to connect your laptop, mobile phone or other device to a screen to present evidence.

The guidance includes tips on using video links, DVDs and extended desktops.

Court presentations user guide


  Court presentations user guide (PDF, 418KB, 16 pages)
  How to fix ClickShare problems on a MacBook for users in court





      
        
    Published 14 March 2016
    Last updated 26 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 March 2021
              Added call out note signposting to new system.
            
            
              17 December 2020
              Deleted the video section as the videos were no longer working.
Added link to new guidance for users experiencing difficulties using ClickShare software on MacBooks.
            
            
              2 October 2020
              Updated attachment
            
            
              6 February 2020
              Revised clickshare user guide uploaded.
            
            
              14 March 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        How to fix ClickShare problems on a MacBook for users in court
        Evidence Presentation System Guide

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Courts, sentencing and tribunals

  


  

  


    
  


    