    



 the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and act to safeguard employees, some have started to relocate around 15–20 percent of their on-site workforce by setting up “control towers” to facilitate remote working (especially for non-frontline roles like subject-matter experts). This is helping the industry develop more resilient, responsive, and flexible operating models suited to an increasingly uncertain environment. Now, however, companies are rapidly advancing their capabilities for remote means of working and collaboration. As expected, executives have a renewed interest in remote operating centers (ROCs) that build on remote working capabilities to unlock additional value, such as enhancing decision making by integrating functions across the value chain. Although not a new concept, ROCs present an opportunity for mining companies to reimagine and reform the ways they operate as remote working becomes imperative to ensuring value and sustainability.Varied ROC landscapeROCs harness technology to ensure safe, reliable operations from a centralized location. However, the maturity and sophistication of these collaborative workplaces varies based on the capabilities available within the mining organization. Some companies have implemented cloud-based systems that aggregate site data into a single data lake that can be accessed, analyzed, and visualized for decision support, creating a “room of screens”; other companies manage and actively control plant automation systems, fleet management systems, and remote-controlled machines from the ROC. The most sophisticated companies manage all these functions on a larger geographic scale, covering the value chain from end to end, optimizing post-processed ore logistics and port facilities used by multiple mine sites within a region, with regional parts and supply warehouses monitored across multiple assets for supply-chain optimization. The larger span of control of such operations helps to maximize best-practice benefits across site assets to drive operational improvements such as predictive maintenance among similar mine fleets.Generally, companies focus on a combination of four value levers (Exhibit 1). We found that companies implementing ROCs tend to concentrate on a subset of these levers, although the most successful implementations capture value across all.
    
Observations from reviewing ROC implementations in miningWhen we analyzed the challenges organizations must overcome to capture full value, we were surprised to find that companies generally do not see the technology development or investment costs for ROC implementation as major pain points. As one CIO told us, “The technology is the easy part.” Numerous options for communications and data management exist, allowing mining companies to effectively implement and control applications that would normally be installed on site from a remote location.
        


    
    Yet, only a few companies have demonstrated an ability to capture the full value potential in a ROC. Our research unearthed a common theme underpinning the root causes for this failure—insufficient emphasis on and investment in developing a robust change-management strategy and subsequent implementation. Two typical scenarios are discernable across the industry:
    
    

        


    
    Key factors for success when implementing ROCsSuccess stories tell us that capturing the full potential of a ROC involves shifting to a new way of working. Leaders need to set an aspirational vision early on, setting out what the future operating model will look like. Five principles emerge when thinking about how to create value through ROCs, and each of these principles needs to be tailored specifically to the organization when applied.
    
    
    
    
    

    

    
Mining companies around the world are preparing to switch from crisis mode to establishing ROCs as the next normal for their operations. A collaborative, remote-working model, centered around a ROC-based architecture, can help companies capture the value of co-locating high-performing cross-functional teams to drive end-to-end decision making based on truly integrated information systems. Even beyond the very real need to build resilient operations that can thrive in times of crises, this can help create a smarter, safer, more productive, and more enjoyable workplace for future generations of digitally enabled mining workers.