
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Environmental permitting: air dispersion modelling reports
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what you must include in an air dispersion modelling report to get an environmental permit.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Environment Agency and Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      1 November 2014
      Last updated
      
        19 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England

                Guidance for Wales
          Guidance for Scotland
          Guidance for Northern Ireland


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Explain your report

        
        
          Include a location map

        
        
          List emissions and environmental standards for air

        
        
          Work out ambient and background levels

        
        
          Explain the model

        
        
          Explain emission parameters

        
        
          Explain the modelled domain and receptors

        
        
          Explain meteorological data and surface characteristics

        
        
          Explain terrain and building treatments

        
        
          Estimate model uncertainty

        
        
          Carry out sensitivity analysis

        
        
          Special treatments

        
        
          Carry out impact assessment

        
        
          Include input files and input parameters

        
        
          Contact

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
You must carry out detailed modelling assessment on any emissions that you did not screen out through your air emissions risk assessment. Detailed modelling will identify if these emissions could harm the environment or human health.

You need to include all the information explained in this guide, in your report. If you do not include some information, you’ll need to explain why. There needs to be enough information in the report to make an exact copy of the model.

If your risk assessment identifies that your operation is likely to cause odour problems, you may need to model odour exposure. The guide H4 odour management has more information.

Explain your report
At the start of your report you must:


  explain the purpose of the study
  describe the site
  explain the modelled scenarios and how they represent your operations


Include a location map
You must include a map that:


  shows the location of the proposed site and surrounding land use
  shows the size of the modelled area
  uses National Grid referencing and indicates terrain contours, such as the Ordnance Survey Landranger series (1:50,000)


List emissions and environmental standards for air
You must provide a list of the emissions modelled, including their chemical specification. For example, oxides of nitrogen and halogenated compounds.

You must also identify the relevant environmental standard for air emissions for these substances.

Work out ambient and background levels
You must:


  work out a representative value for the background concentration
  explain how your background concentrations are representative of the local environment


Find this information from:


  local authority ambient monitoring data
  
background maps produced by Defra
  
data from Defra national monitoring networks


If you use a different source for this information, you need to explain why.

Explain the model
You must list the:


  dispersion modelling software used
  software name, including version number
  type of model, for example Gaussian or new-generation
  supplier


The model you use must be fit for purpose, based on established science, and be validated and independently reviewed.

Explain emission parameters
You must provide and explain the following information, including relevant units, in a table.


  
    
      Parameter
      Units
    
  
  
    
      Stack location
      (grid reference)
    
    
      Stack height
      (metres)
    
    
      Pollutant emission rate
      (grammes per second)
    
    
      Exit diameter
      (metres)
    
    
      Exit temperature
      (kelvin, degrees celcius)
    
  


If relevant to your model, you must also provide information about one or more of the following parameters.


  
    
      Parameter
      Units
    
  
  
    
      Efflux velocity
      (metres per second)
    
    
      Volumetric flow rate (actual)
      (cubic metres per second)
    
    
      Volumetric flow rate (at reference conditions)
      (normal cubic metres per second)
    
  


You must explain how you have worked out the emission rates used in your model.

You can calculate these rates using chimney exit concentration values from the appropriate BAT conclusion document or by using a measured concentration value. Where you use measured concentrations you need to include the raw monitoring data.

You must also include other relevant data, including:


  temperature
  actual oxygen and moisture levels used to adjust volumetric flows
  emissions and source terms that vary with time, if appropriate


If you have modelled a source other than a point source you need to explain the source type. For example area, line, volume or other, and their emission parameters.

Explain the modelled domain and receptors
You need to justify the resolution of the model receptor grid you use.

If it’s relevant to your model, you must give the assumed height above ground level for the receptors.

You must also give details of any discrete receptors and include grid references used to assess impact at sensitive locations.

Explain meteorological data and surface characteristics
You must explain your choice of meteorological data and say why it’s representative. You also need to explain how the surface characteristics you have chosen represent land use. For example, surface roughness, albedo, Bowen ratio or Priestley-Taylor parameter.

Your report must include:


  the location of the chosen Met Office weather station in relation to the modelled domain
  the number of years covered by the data – 5 is recommended but it must be a minimum of 3
  the source of the data, for example, the UK Met Office
  a description of the data quality and uncertainties relating to any alternative meteorological data
  the format of the meteorological data – hourly sequential or long-term statistical
  a wind rose showing the distribution of wind speed and direction


Explain terrain and building treatments
You must justify why you have included terrain and building treatments in your assessment. If you have not, you’ll need to explain why.

Your report should:


  justify why you have included building treatment in your assessment – if you have not, explain why
  explain the source, format and processing of digital terrain data used in the model
  show the location and dimensions of all buildings included in the model, including National Grid reference, height, width and rotation
  show the location and relative orientation of buildings and their dimensions on a site plan


Estimate model uncertainty
You must show that you have estimated the level of uncertainty in your predictions.

Look at validation documents for examples of the differences between measured values and those estimated by models.

Where the validation documents indicate levels of uncertainty that might affect your conclusions, you need to consider running your data through another validated model to check the differences between models.

You will need to carry out sensitivity analysis to deal with variability in your input data.

Carry out sensitivity analysis
You must show how the model is affected by:


  meteorological data, such as different Met Office weather stations, data sources, inter-annual variation and surface characteristics
  emission parameters, such as stack parameters, pollutant release rates and different plant operating scenarios
  the receptor grid resolution
  treatment of terrain and buildings


Special treatments

Describe the input parameters and any assumptions you have made on specialised model treatments, such as:


  coastal models
  fluctuations
  photochemistry
  wet or dry deposition
  flare releases
  short-term (puff) releases
  effects of wind turbines
  post-processing or short-term statistical analysis – to calculate the likelihood of intermittent emissions coinciding with meteorological conditions that could increase pollution


Carry out impact assessment
Your assessment must present the post-processing of relevant percentile values with the addition of background concentrations.

You must also justify any assumptions you have made relating to pollutant conversion processes (such as nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide photochemistry) for different averaging times. For combustion processes where no more than 10% of nitrogen oxides are emitted as nitrogen dioxide, you can assume worst case conversion ratios to nitrogen dioxide of:


  35% for short-term average concentrations
  70% for long-term average concentrations


Breaches of environmental standards for air
You must comment on any potential breaches of environmental standards for air emissions. You must take into account model uncertainty and where relevant provide an assessment of different:


  stack heights
  emission characteristics
  process operation scenarios


Contour plots
You must provide contour plots for each air quality objective you assess. These must:


  include the pollutant name and modelling scenario
  provide averaging time and appropriate percentile plotted, clearly indicating areas of exceedance
  use the same colour scale for all contour plots relating to a particular air quality objective


Present your results
Your results must be:


  for the locations of maximum air quality impacts
  at discrete sensitive receptor locations


Present them in a table showing:


  the process contribution (PC)
  predicted environmental concentration (PEC) – which is the PC plus ambient background concentration values
  PCs and PECs as a percentage of the relevant environmental standard for air


You must include a discussion of results (what they mean and their significance) before you make your final conclusions.

For a detailed modelling assessment PCs are insignificant where they are less than:


  10% of a short-term environmental standard
  1% of a long-term environmental standard


At the detailed modelling stage there are no criteria to determine whether:


  PCs are significant
  PECs are insignificant or significant


You must explain how you judged significance and base this on the site specific circumstances.

Include input files and input parameters
You must include the input files for the air dispersion model you have used, in addition to your report.

You must provide a separate annex with a table of all the input parameters you have used within your model that supports any:


  air quality impact assessment
  human health risk assessment
  odour impact assessment


You must provide enough data so that we can audit the model configuration you have used.

We’ll audit the model configuration and check the parameter values you have used to define sources of emissions and meteorological inputs to the model.

Contact


    General enquiries

    
      National Customer Contact Centre PO Box 544RotherhamS60 1BY
    

    
        
          Email enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 03708 506 506
        
        
          Telephone from outside the UK (Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm GMT) +44 (0) 114 282 5312
        
    

    Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm.  The impact of COVID-19 means you may experience some delays in responses.



If you have a query about producing air dispersion modelling reports:

Email: aqmau@environment-agency.gov.uk





      
        
    Published 1 November 2014
    Last updated 19 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 January 2021
              We have added the requirement that you must provide a separate annex with a table of all the input paramaters you have used.
            
            
              24 May 2019
              We have: added that we need enough information in the report to make an exact copy of the model; changed air quality standards to environmental standards for air; linked to Defra national monitoring networks; added more detail on emission rates calculations; added clarity on post-processing under special treatments; added information on impact assessment for combustion processes and added clarity to ‘present your results’.
            
            
              1 November 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Air emissions risk assessment for your environmental permit
        Risk assessments for specific activities: environmental permits
        Environmental permitting: H4 odour management
        Assess the impact of air emissions on global warming
        Best available techniques: environmental permits

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Environmental permits

  


  

  


    
  


    