
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Factsheet on Intellectual Property best practice in UK-China technology transfer
  

  
  

  
    
  Technology transfer is a general term used to describe the commercialisation of research and knowledge generated from the research base. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      9 July 2013
      Last updated
      
        9 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Factsheet on Intellectual Property best practice in UK-China technology transfer
    
        PDF, 605KB, 3 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Technology transfer is a general term used to describe the commercialisation of research and knowledge generated from the research base. The intellectual property (IP) considerations in any particular technology transfer deal will depend on the route selected to commercialise a new opportunity. This factsheet examines IP-related factors in UK-China technology transfer.

Return to the UK-China IP Webpage




        
      

      
    Published 9 July 2013
    Last updated 9 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 April 2021
              Updated new version
            
            
              9 July 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Factsheet on Administrative Enforcement of Copyright in China
        Factsheet on Trade Secrets in China
        Factsheet on Intellectual Property & Architecture in China
        Factsheet on Intellectual Property & Film in China
        Report on China-Southeast Asia Anti-Counterfeiting

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  




      

    World locations

  


        China

  


  

  


    
  


    