







Development of a Quality-Controlled Chlorine Gas Concentration Data Base for the Jack Rabbit II Field Experiments
Published in: Atmospheric Environment, Volume 246 (February 2021). doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117997 Posted on RAND.org on January 26, 2021
by Joseph C. Chang, Thomas Mazzola, Steven R. Hanna
Related Topics: Environmental Science and Technology, Modeling and Simulation

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at Atmospheric EnvironmentThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








The Jack Rabbit II (JR II) field experiments involved a series of trials in 2015 and 2016, each with 5–20 tons of pressurized liquefied chlorine released. All five trials in 2015 had vertically downward releases. The four trials in 2016 involved different release orientations. Roughly 200 chlorine sensors of four types (Jaz, Canary, MiniRAE, and ToxiRAE) were on the test grid at fixed locations during each trial, placed along 90 deg concentric arcs from 0.2 to 11 km from the source. These sensors use different technologies and have different detection ranges. All sensors were carefully calibrated, but pre- and post-trial challenge test results show that the MiniRAE sensors tended to drift. We applied special corrections to the MiniRAE data to correct for the drift. The roughly 19 million concentration records were further quality-assured and condensed to summary tables that include the maximum concentrations. This condensed data set was used in the model evaluation study described in the current special issue. Preliminary analyses suggest that, despite the necessary corrections to the MiniRAE data and the saturation of some sensors, the JR II concentration data in general are of good quality. For example, collocated sensors show good agreement, the arc-maximum normalized concentrations with downwind distance follow the –5/3 power law, and the limited sensor vertical profile data show that cloud heights increase with downwind distance. Future field campaigns of similar scale should carefully examine experimental setup and the latest detection technologies to avoid instrument saturation.

Access further information on this document at Atmospheric EnvironmentThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

Homeland Security Research Division



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Elsevier LtdPublisher: Science Direct
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 10
Document Number: EP-68464
Year: 2021
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Environmental Science and TechnologyModeling and Simulation

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




