Turkey represents one of the most advanced mobility ecosystems in the region. It is, therefore, not surprising that the shared and electric mobility segment have recently gained traction, too. In this article, we assess the mobility market in Turkey and provide a sizing of todays and 2030 mobility landscape, including a deep dive on shared micromobility. The latter is based on our publication “Micromobility’s 15,000-mile checkup” from 2019 (), where we estimated the market potential for e-kickscooters, bicycles, and mopeds across the United States, Europe, and China to reach 300 to 500 billion USD by 2030.The total addressable mobility market (TAM) in Turkey is worth around 55 to 65 billion USD today, or roughly 700 to 710 billion in total passenger kilometers traveled (PMT).
    
Istanbul, a metropolis with almost 16 million inhabitants, leads the mobility demand and constitutes around 20% of total PMT. Around 80 cities and rural areas account for the remaining ~80% of total PMT, whilst peripheral cities and rural areas take the largest share


.Private vehicles and public transport (including public bus, metro, and train) are the main modes of transport; however, their importance varies by city archetype: whilst public transport is relevant across all archetypes (mainly due to comparatively low fare prices), private vehicle usage is particularly high in large metropolises with a high GDP per capita (e.g., Istanbul or Ankara). Consequently, private vehicles account for a TAM of around 230 to 250 billion passenger kilometers today (equivalent to around 28 to 32 billion USD), whilst public transit adds another 270 to 290 billion PMT (equivalent to around 10 to 15 billion USD).Micromobility, including traditional and electric bicycles, mopeds, and kickscooters, is mainly present in emerging and peripheral cities (e.g., Adana, Diyarbakır), where it is almost entirely available as privately owned mode. Shared micromobility, on the other side, still plays a minor role today and is estimated to be a 20 to 30 million USD market, wherein Istanbul accounts for ~60%. Shared e-kickscooters are the dominating mode with ~80% share, whilst shared bicycles cover ~15% and shared mopeds ~5%.Taxis are present in almost all Turkish cities, constituting around 5% of total PMT, which translates into a TAM of 9 to 12 billion USD today. Compared to this, car rental and carsharing (including station-based, free-floating and peer-to-peer carsharing) are usually only available in large urban and touristic areas and thus account for less than 0.1% of total PMT, implying a TAM of currently 1 to 3 billion USD.
    
To estimate the mobility development across Turkey, we introduce 5 different city archetypes and cluster the 81 Turkish cities and rural areas along them.Our modeling of the future mobility development of these city archetypes is based on McKinsey's proprietary Mobility Market Model (M3), which follows a four-step approach to forecast the mobility demand until 2030. In the first step, we determine a “no disruption” PMT baseline by extrapolating today's archetype-specific mode splits using forecasts on GDP, population and age group distribution. Secondly, we introduce assumptions on how consumer behavior and regulation might change the baseline across three different scenarios. The modeled consumer effects are based on our proprietary ACES Consumer Survey, whilst the regulatory effects are drawn upon over 70 case studies on regulations and their impact on the modal mix across more than 25 cities globally. In a third step, we reallocate the PMTs which are gained or lost by certain modes as a direct result of the scenario disruptions to other modes of transport, factoring in their availability and cost. Finally, we convert the PMT into USD revenues by considering Turkey-specific pricing per kilometer.We model three different scenarios to investigate the impact from macroeconomic developments, investments, consumer attitudes, and regulation. The three scenarios describe the potential development if (1) the status quo today is maintained by 2030 and Turkish cities show a similar shared micromobility development as comparable European and Asian cities, (2) if cities invest in public and micromobility infrastructure and introduce measures to de-incentivize private car usage, and (3) if cities lift their current restrictions on shared mobility.
    
    
    
Of the 15 to 25 billion PMT traveled by shared micromobility in the “disruptive scenario” mentioned above, almost 50 percent would have used car-based mobility if shared micromobility were not available (incl. private vehicle, taxi, carsharing and ride-hailing)


. The remaining trips would have come from non-car-based mobility such as public transit, private micromobility and walking. Considering the cannibalization of car-based mobility, shared micromobility could save an estimated 850 to 900 thousand tons of carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions per year, which corresponds to the annual CO2 emissions of around 180 thousand Turkish citizens


.Besides shared micromobility, we expect electrification in Turkey to emerge amongst all modes of transport until 2030. Electric vehicle (EV) penetration may reach 40 to 50 percent of new vehicle sales in 2030 in our disruptive scenario. This includes private, taxi, ride-hailing, and car rental/ carsharing vehicles (see our recent publication on “”)


. Small-format EVs such as microcars could even accelerate this development, since they are often more affordable than comparable vehicles with internal combustion engines (ICE), given their small battery size. Based on a 40 to 50 percent EV sales penetration, we expect that 6 to 8% of the vehicle parc in Turkey could be electrified by 2030.