
      



  
    


      
    Statutory guidance
  

  
  
    Licence for police forces to interfere with protected species during crime investigations (CL30)
  

  
  

  
    
  Get a licence to carry out investigations of wildlife and other crime that could affect protected species and their habitats in England.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Natural England

      
      Published
      1 January 2017
      Last updated
      
        1 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Licence to carry out wildlife crime investigation (CL30)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex A: to interfere with badger setts
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex B: to disturb and take European protected species
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex C: to disturb and take any wildlife listed in schedules 1, 5 and 8 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex D: to possess and move dead specimens of any species mentioned above and species listed on Annex IIb (plants) and IV (animals) of the Habitats Directive
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Appendix 1 - training or experience requirements 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Report actions taken under licence CL30
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 40.9KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@naturalengland.org.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This licence applies to police forces in England only.


One employee of each police force (normally the wildlife crime officer) must be registered to gather evidence at the scene of wildlife and other crime.


You, as the ‘registered person’, can:


  interfere with badger setts (see annex A)
  disturb and take European protected species (see annex B)
  disturb and take any wildlife listed in schedules 1, 5 and 8 of the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 (see annex C)
  possess and move dead specimens of any species mentioned above and species listed on Annex IIb (plants) and IV (animals) of the Habitats Directive (see annex D)


Read appendix 1 of licence CL30 to find out what training or experience you need to carry out activities allowed by this licence.

How to register to use this licence

You must be registered to use this licence. Only one person from each police force can register. This is usually the wildlife crime officer. You must tell Natural England if the registered person changes.

If you’re registered, you can authorise other officers and employees of the same police force or a person assisting the police, such as an ecological consultant, to carry out the investigation work.

To register for this licence email wildlife.scicons@naturalengland.org.uk and give your:


  name
  police force
  role in your police force
  contact address and post code, telephone number and email address
  ‘collar number’ if you are a police officer


How to report your actions

You must send an annual record of all activity carried out under this licence to Natural England by 31 January each year. You should send your report using the licence report form attached.

Sending an annual report also renews your registration to use this licence.




        
      

      
    Published 1 January 2017
    Last updated 1 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 January 2021
              Annual licence update.
            
            
              19 November 2020
              Accessible version of licence CL30 plus 4 Annexes and 1 appendix on training requirements added - HTML documents.
            
            
              6 February 2020
              Report form replaced with new version.
            
            
              1 January 2020
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2020
            
            
              1 January 2019
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2019. Replaced report form with new version.
            
            
              1 January 2018
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2018
            
            
              1 January 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Class licences for wildlife management

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Protected sites and species

  


  

  


    
  


    