
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    African Cyber Experts Fellowship: lessons learnt report 2020
  

  
  

  
    
  This report brings together lessons learned from cyber security discussions held as part of the Fellowship programme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      8 March 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    African Cyber Experts Fellowship: lessons learnt report 2020
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    African Cyber Experts Fellowship: lessons learnt report 2020
    
        ODT, 801KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Following the London 2018 Commonwealth Cyber Declaration, the UK government implemented a series of projects to help Commonwealth countries improve their cyber security capacity.

The Cyber Experts’ Fellowship: Bridging the Cyber Skills Gap in Africa created a working network of African cyber security policy experts. They act as a hub for cascading best practice in important cybersecurity challenges across the continent through individual and joint projects.

The Fellowship Network itself is the key output of the project, to be referred to as the Africa Cyber Experts Network.



        
      

      
    Published 8 March 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Venture Capital Trusts: December 2020
        Planning Inspectorate statistical release 19 August 2021
        Building materials and components statistics: December 2019
        DFID: workforce management information September 2019
        Preston guidance: November 2017

  




      

    Collection

  


        Cyber security capacity-building in the Commonwealth 2018 to 2021

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        The Commonwealth
        Cyber security

  




      

    Topical events

  


        Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2018 

  




      

    World locations

  


        UK and the Commonwealth

  


  

  


    
  


    