
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Clean Air Zones
  

  
  
  
      
  Where you’ll find Clean Air Zones, how to check if you'll need to pay a charge and create a business account, and what support or exemptions are available.	

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      28 January 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Cities with Clean Air Zones

        
        
          Types of Clean Air Zones

        
        
          Minimum emission standards

        
        
          Check and pay a charge

        
        
          Exemptions

        
        
          Refunds

        
        
          Get support to reduce your emissions

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To improve air quality, some local authorities are introducing Clean Air Zones. If your vehicle exceeds emission standards, you may have to pay a charge if you drive in a Clean Air Zone.

Cities with Clean Air Zones

Bath has a Class C Clean Air Zone.

Birmingham has a Class D Clean Air Zone.

Portsmouth has a Class B Clean Air Zone.

Future Clean Air Zones

Bradford will start charging in 2022.

Greater Manchester will start charging on 30 May 2022.

More cities will implement Clean Air Zones in 2022.

Types of Clean Air Zones

There are 4 types of Clean Air Zones, Class A to D.


  
    
      Class
      Vehicle type
    
  
  
    
      A
      Buses, coaches, taxis, private hire vehicles
    
    
      B
      Buses, coaches, taxis, private hire vehicles, heavy goods vehicles
    
    
      C
      Buses, coaches, taxis, private hire vehicles, heavy goods vehicles, vans, minibuses
    
    
      D
      Buses, coaches, taxis, private hire vehicles, heavy goods vehicles, vans, minibuses, cars, the local authority has the option to include motorcycles
    
  


Minimum emission standards

Each vehicle type has a minimum emission standard. You can find your vehicle’s emission standard in your vehicle logbook or from your vehicle manufacturer.

To avoid being charged in a Clean Air Zone, your vehicle must meet the following minimum standard:


  
    
      Vehicle type
      Clean Air Zone minimum standard
    
  
  
    
      Buses, coaches, heavy goods vehicles
      Euro VI
    
    
      Vans, minibuses, taxis, private hire vehicles, cars
      Euro 6 (diesel) and Euro 4 (petrol)
    
    
      Motorcycles
      Euro 3
    
  


Local authorities may set a different standard for taxis and private hire vehicles. You should always check if you will need to pay a charge or contact the local authority for more information.

Check and pay a charge

You can check if you’ll need to pay a charge for a vehicle before you drive in a Clean Air Zone. If you’re a business, you can check and pay for multiple vehicles.

Use the online service to check or pay a charge in a Clean Air Zone.

The maximum payment that can be made in a single transaction is £5,000. Payments that exceed this limit will need to be split into separate transactions.

You must pay the charge by 11:59pm on the sixth day after driving into the zone. You can pay up to 6 days before you travel. If you do not pay the charge in this time, you may get a penalty charge notice (PCN).

If you’re a business with multiple vehicles

Businesses that own or manage 2 or more UK registered vehicles can set up an account to check and pay charges for multiple vehicles. You can create an account when you check or pay online.

To create an account you’ll need:


  your company name
  an email address


Once your account is set up, you can:


  upload multiple number plates from a spreadsheet (CSV) or add them one by one
  view what each vehicle will be charged in each clean air zone
  manage your vehicles - add and remove them
  add up to 10 team members to help manage the account
  set up an agreement to pay by bank account, ready for when charging starts
  view maps of the clean air zones, see when they are live and find out about exemptions


Exemptions

There are some national and local exemptions from the charge.

You’re automatically entitled to a national exemption, and do not have to pay a charge, if you have:


  a vehicle that’s ultra low emission
  a disabled passenger tax class vehicle
  a disabled tax class vehicle
  a military vehicle
  a historic vehicle
  a vehicle retrofitted with technology accredited by the Clean Vehicle Retrofit Accreditation Scheme (CVRAS)
  certain types of agricultural vehicles


You can find out more about local exemptions for driving in:


  Bath
  Birmingham
  Bradford
  Greater Manchester
  Portsmouth


There is a temporary exemption in Greater Manchester for light goods vehicles until 31 May 2023.

Refunds

You may be able to claim a refund if you paid the charge when you did not need to. Find out more about claiming a refund in:


  Bath
  Birmingham


Get support to reduce your emissions

You can get support to reduce your emissions and stop paying Clean Air Zone charges:


  the Office for Zero Emission Vehicles offers a range of grants to help you choose cleaner vehicles
  the Go Ultra Low Campaign has information about electric vehicles, including grants you can apply for
  the Clean Air Fund provides support to individuals and businesses, for example local travel discounts, cycling to work schemes or vehicle upgrades – you can access it through your local authority


Your local authority may provide support to help you upgrade or replace your vehicle:


  Bath’s financial assistance scheme


Your local authority may also provide information about cycling and public transport options in Clean Air Zones for:


  Bath
  Birmingham


Contact us

You can contact Clean Air Zone support using the online contact form or by phone.



Clean Air Zone support
Telephone: 0300 029 8888
Monday to Friday, 8am to 7pm
Saturday, 8am to 2pm 







      
        
    Published 28 January 2020
    Last updated 29 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 November 2021
              Updated to reflect that Portsmouth is now charging. Portsmouth has a Class B Clean Air Zone.
            
            
              16 November 2021
              Added link to exemptions for Bradford.
            
            
              15 November 2021
              Updated the Future Clean Air Zones to include Bradford (charging starts 2022) and Greater Manchester (charging starts on 30 May 2022). Updated exemptions to include Greater Manchester.
            
            
              6 October 2021
              Added Portsmouth charging start date: 29 November 2021.
            
            
              4 October 2021
              Updated contact details - support now open on Saturdays 8am to 2pm and until 7pm during the week.
            
            
              1 October 2021
              Added link to claiming refund in Birmingham.
            
            
              7 July 2021
              Added Portsmouth to the future Clean Air Zones and exemptions list, and updated when you need to pay a charge.
            
            
              1 June 2021
              Updated details of the Birmingham Class D Clean Air Zone.
            
            
              24 May 2021
              Added maximum payment information.
            
            
              8 April 2021
              Updated information about when to pay the charge and the refund link.
            
            
              15 March 2021
              Bath Clean Air Zone has launched, updated content about how to pay the charge and how to get a refund. Updated exemptions list. Removed London ULEZ link as this is not a Clean Air Zone.
            
            
              11 January 2021
              Updated with guidance on checking charges for multiple business vehicles.
            
            
              13 October 2020
              Removed information about Leeds as Leeds City Council have decided not to introduce a clean air zone.
            
            
              8 October 2020
              Added launch dates for Bath and Birmingham clean air zones.
            
            
              24 August 2020
              Opening times for helpdesk changed to Monday to Friday, 8am to 4.30pm.
            
            
              27 July 2020
              Added links to Bath, Birmingham and Leeds city council websites for more information about local exemptions, support to upgrade or replace vehicles, and alternatives to driving.
            
            
              4 May 2020
              Helpdesk number updated and link to online contact form added.
            
            
              28 January 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Air quality: clean air zone framework for England
        Drive in a clean air zone
        Vehicle Excise Duty rates for motorhomes from 12 March 2020
        Make a claim to a deceased person's estate
        Vehicle Excise Duty rates for cars, vans, motorcycles and trade licences from April 2021

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Transport
        Pollution and environmental quality

  


  

  


    
  


    