

Skill Development
Photo by eakgrungenerd/AdobeStock
Identifying training, curriculum, and skills required for employment successWorkers need to acquire relevant skills through education or experience to survive and thrive in the economy. Our work shows why and how employers, education and training institutions, and workers can collaborate to make skill acquisition a priority in a rapidly changing world.
New from the Center

/content/rand/education-and-labor/centers/middle-class-pathways/skill-development/jcr:content/par/wrapperdiv/teaserlist



Research BriefBuilding Ohio's Workforce Through Stackable CredentialsOhio has been a leader in scaling stackable credential programs since passing initial legislation on stackable credentials nearly 15 years ago. Over this time, Ohio saw strong growth in short-term credential programs. And most individuals who stacked credentials earned a degree.


ReportAre Income Share Agreements Fair?Income share agreements provide access to postsecondary education for students who could not otherwise pay for school. Borrowers pay back a share of their salary when they get a well-paying job. But since ISAs are not regulated or standardized, they pose unique risks and have the potential for discrimination.


ReportThe Credentials Students Earn Beyond a High School DiplomaAmericans can pursue a variety of different types of postsecondary education credentials. These include degrees, certificates, industry certifications and licenses, and apprenticeships. Who is earning these postsecondary credentials? And how diverse are they?


ReportFortifying Education as a Pathway to the Middle ClassEducation levels in the United States have been rising for 50 years, including large gains for many demographic groups. Adults with college degrees have higher incomes than their less-educated peers. But declining public support for higher education and increasing costs are making it harder to obtain degrees.


Related Publications



Stacking Educational Credentials in Ohio: Pathways Through Postsecondary Education in Health Care, Manufacturing and Engineering Technology, and Information Technology 
Lindsay Daugherty, Jenna W. Kramer, Drew M. Anderson, Robert BozickRAND researchers examine students who earned postsecondary certificates in Ohio and went on to earn additional educational credentials. The researchers describe which types of credentials were earned and how students progressed through institutions.



Supporting Middle-Skills STEM Workforce Development: Analysis of Workplace Skills in Demand and Education Institutions' Curricular Offerings in the Oil and Gas Sector 
Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Christopher Joseph Doss, Julia H. Kaufman, Robert BozickIn this report, researchers examine the alignment of college STEM education with the needs of employers in the tri-state region of Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, as well as STEM areas in which college students need more support.



Preparing New York City High School Students for the Workforce: Evaluation of the Scholars at Work Program 
Robert Bozick, Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Serafina Lanna, Monica MeanThis report evaluates the Scholars at Work program, which connects students in Career and Technical Education courses at New York City high schools with local employers to improve the career chances of the students and meet the needs of employers.



What Happens When You Combine High School and College? The Impact of the Early College Model on Postsecondary Performance and Completion 
Julie Edmunds, Fatih Unlu, Jane Furey, Elizabeth J. Glennie, Nina ArshavskyWhat happens when you combine high school and college? The impact of the early college model on postsecondary performance and completion.



The Appalachia Partnership Initiative's Investments in Education, Workforce Development, and Catalyzing the Community: Reflections from 2014 Through 2019 
Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Nupur Nanda, Shelly Culbertson, Harold D. Green, Kristin J. LeuschnerRAND researchers trace the impact of the Appalachia Partnership Initiative investments on science, technology, engineering, and math education for grades K-12 and energy and advanced manufacturing workforce development from 2014 through 2019.



A One-Stop Approach to Supporting the Nonacademic Needs of Community College Students: An Evaluation of Single Stop's Impact in North Carolina 
Lindsay Daugherty, Tiffany BerglundThis report examines the impact of using Single Stop (a program that connects college students to governmental, community, and institutional resources) on postsecondary outcomes for students at four community colleges in North Carolina.



Energy-Sector Workforce Development in West Virginia: Aligning Community College Education and Training with Needed Skills 
Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Sean Robson, Andrea Phillips, Gerald P. Hunter, David S. OrtizIn 2013, the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) asked RAND to work closely with the Community and Technical College System of West Virginia on a collaborative strategy for preparing the local talent pool for the energy-sector workforce.



Effectiveness of Screened, Demand-Driven Job Training Programs for Disadvantaged Workers: An Evaluation of the New Orleans Career Pathway Training 
Matthew D. Baird, John Engberg, Gabriella C. Gonzalez, Thomas Goughnour, Italo A. Gutierrez, Rita T. KaramThe authors of this report examine the implementation and effectiveness of a New Orleans job training program that helped lower-skilled, unemployed, and underemployed individuals train for and find skilled jobs in particular industries.


Related Projects



Improving Pre-Engineering and Computer Science Education Through Micro-Credentialing
Louisiana STEM micro-credential project is a partnership between the Louisiana Department of Education, Louisiana State University (LSU), BloomBoard Inc., and the RAND Corporation to develop and study a set of STEM micro-credentials. The micro-credentials are aligned to the content of the courses taught in the pathways and are intended to help teachers apply their STEM training to the classes they teach. The goal of the micro-credentials is to provide job-embedded professional development that will improve teacher instruction and student learning.




Mapping Workforce Certificate and Degree Pathways in Ohio: Are Postsecondary Training Opportunities Setting Students Up for Success?
Project partnered with the Ohio Department of Higher Education aims to develop a clear understanding of the progression of students through Ohio’s workforce certificate and degree pathways and transitions into (and out of) the workforce; and to engage with policymakers and practitioners across Ohio to inform policy and practice.





An Analysis of Education and Training Programs in Advanced Manufacturing Using Robotics
On behalf of the Advanced Robotics Manufacturing Institute (ARMI), RAND conducted a review and analysis of the extant literature on the extent and economic impacts of advanced manufacturing nationally.





Mapping Workforce Certificate and Degree Pathways in Ohio: Are We Effectively Providing Postsecondary Training Opportunities to Support Employment Among Adult Learners?
An exploratory, descriptive one-year study of student progress through Ohio's workforce certificate and degree pathways using the state's longitudinal higher education and employment data.





The Evaluation of Career and College Promise: A Partnership between the North Carolina Community College System, the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction, and SERVE Center at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro
RAND is evaluating the implementation and impact of Career and College Promise (CCP), a statewide policy that focused North Carolina’s dual enrollment program through pathways. The goal is to maximize state resources by ensuring that students have a better chance of success when taking college courses and to help ensure that the college courses they take in high school are aligned to careers or can move them further toward their education.





Scholars at Work Program Evaluation
An evaluation of the implementation, effectiveness, and impact of the Scholars at Work program (SaW) for the New York City Center for Economic Opportunity, in partnership with the NYC Department of Small Business Services and the NYC Department of Education. SaW provides Career and Technical Education to high school students studying technical skills in critical economic sectors with opportunities to apply these skills in authentic industry settings.





The Appalachia Partnership Initiative
The project is a five-year effort to improve access to and quality of STEM K-12 education and workforce development programs in advanced manufacturing and the energy sector. The initiative is funded by Chevron Corporation, and the RAND Corporation is providing objective analysis for its programs.





Preparing Local Talent for Jobs in the Sub-baccalaureate STEM Economy: A Study of the Marcellus ShaleNET Program and the Energy Sector
RAND is conducting a multi-method study of the ShaleNET Program, a partnership between energy employers and colleges in Ohio, Pennsylvania and West-Virginia. The program provides sub-baccalaureate training programs for semi-skilled STEM jobs in the energy sector.





