Preom Sarkar has been an ORISE Fellow for the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) since June of 2019. Her work as a geomicrobiology researcher fits well with her blended background. Preom graduated with her B.S. in Bioengineering with a focus in pharmaceuticals from Lehigh University in 2018. In May 2019, she graduated with her M.S. in Environmental Engineering with a focus in water sustainability from Carnegie Mellon University. At NETL, Preom has been working to analyze the microbial communities in hydraulic fracturing wells and coal fired power plant wastewater effluent. She has also been working with microbes native to wastewater effluent to enrich for organisms that can remove a particular contaminant.When growing up, I generally found myself drawn to math and science in school, but out of school I found myself watching a lot of Animal Planet or National Geographic. Engineering happened to be one of the career paths that was able to blend my talents and interests. The opportunities presented to me in undergrad and graduate school solidified that I made the correct decision in pursuing STEM.I’m pretty excited about my enrichment work regarding microbes native to wastewater effluent. This is one of the first projects that I got to plan and carry out on my own. The preliminary results have me excited to uncover more about the microbes I’ve been enriching and hopefully what I learn will be useful for future contaminant recovery systems. I think more visibility of these communities is important. Giving more air time and actually giving them a decent seat at the table to engage and share their thoughts and findings to the community will help these communities venture into STEM. It’s also important for these communities to also be represented in management positions because it’s important to show younger generations of what their hard work can lead to.For young women and POC I recommend finding a mentor that you can connect with. This person ideally is someone in the field you want to work in and in a minority demographic you can relate to. I think mentors are very important in shaping the next generation of scientists. Such mentors know what it is like to be young with similar minority struggles while the mentee has no idea what it is like to be older and requires someone else to give an idea of what the future may hold. I also recommend being comfortable with being uncomfortable. This means that you are open to new opportunities that are out of your comfort zone. Say yes often, let yourself explore new ideas and opportunities that you originally thought was not meant for you. I enjoy hiking and frequent Pittsburgh’s Frick Park often after work to walk the trails and decompress. I also love to travel. I dabble a little in photography as well. My indoor hobbies include, watching movies and tv, video games (currently playing Animal Crossing New Horizons obsessively), cooking, reading, and some light arts and crafts. Learn more about our programs & resources for women and girls in STEM at 