

Examines how blockchain, the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence with machine learning, and satellite imaging are being or could be implemented to decrease uncertainty and mitigate risks to support agricultural production and distribution.




Read Online

Addressing Emerging Technology Adoption in Food Production through Digital Games
by Patricia Ann Stapleton, Padmaja Vedula, Jalal Awan, Jonathan Lamb, Timothy R. Gulden, Jonathan Welburn
Related Topics: Agricultural Sciences, Big Data, Emerging Technologies, Food Supply, Food Supply Security, Machine Learning
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


3.3 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Food security is an urgent concern, drawing the attention of policymakers at all levels of governance. Stakeholders have been seeking new approaches to addressing food insecurity, particularly during times of stress in the global food system, and they often view emerging technologies as viable solutions. However, technology adoption must be considered within the context of agriculture's embeddedness in commodity markets, financial systems, political systems, trade arrangements, and sociocultural norms. Through a comprehensive literature review, this paper examines how blockchain, the Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI) with machine learning, and satellite imaging are being or could be implemented to decrease uncertainty and mitigate risks to support agricultural production and distribution. Specifically, it engages with the implications of these technologies for agriculture in less developed regions, with a focus on India and Pakistan. This systematic review also establishes a knowledge base for the development of a paper prototype of a food system game, including a high-level game framework, the initial draft of core rules, and vignettes illustrative of scenarios that might emerge in play. This type of game would allow participants to effectively investigate the various factors and stakeholders involved in the decisionmaking process for technology adoption in agriculture and food production. As such, the paper prototype and our review of the four technological solutions and their potential integration with existing systems, implementation bottlenecks, and the (mis)alignment of various stakeholders aims to provide a blueprint to policymakers interested in ensuring food security at a regional, and by extension, global level.

 Related Products 








Project
Using Emerging Tech to Improve Food Security across South Asia

Jul 30, 2021






Research conducted by

Pardee RAND Graduate School



The research described in this report was conducted by the Pardee Global Human Progress Initiative and Pardee RAND Graduate School's Tech and Narrative Lab.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Working paper series. RAND working papers are intended to share researchers' latest findings and to solicit informal peer review. They have been approved for circulation by RAND but may not have been formally edited or peer reviewed.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 78
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/WRA1526-1
Document Number: WR-A1526-1
Year: 2021
Series: Working Papers



Explore
Related Topics

Agricultural SciencesBig DataEmerging TechnologiesFood SupplyFood Supply SecurityMachine Learning

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Stapleton, Patricia Ann, Padmaja Vedula, Jalal Awan, Jonathan Lamb, Timothy R. Gulden, and Jonathan Welburn, Addressing Emerging Technology Adoption in Food Production through Digital Games. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/working_papers/WRA1526-1.html.
Stapleton, Patricia Ann, Padmaja Vedula, Jalal Awan, Jonathan Lamb, Timothy R. Gulden, and Jonathan Welburn, Addressing Emerging Technology Adoption in Food Production through Digital Games, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, WR-A1526-1, 2021. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/working_papers/WRA1526-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



