
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Use precision application of fertiliser, manure and other inputs
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out how land managers can improve business efficiency, and water and air quality, by switching to precision application of fertiliser and manures.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      7 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        14 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About precision fertiliser and manure application

        
        
          Before you invest in precision application systems and technology

        
        
          Precision application systems and technology

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

If you’re completing this action as part of the Sustainable Farming Incentive pilot, how you do it is up to you.

The advice on this page can help you get better environmental and business benefits, but you do not have to follow it to get paid.


About precision fertiliser and manure application

If you apply inputs of fertiliser and manure, precision application can reduce the amount you use and save you money. This applies to:


  arable crops
  grassland
  forestry
  horticulture


Inputs include:


  livestock manures and slurries
  anaerobic digestates
  composts
  sewage sludge (biosolids)
  artificial fertilisers


You can use precision technology to make sure you match crop and soil nutrients requirements by:


  accurately placing material
  adding material at the correct rate
  testing the nutrient content of any manures, slurries and digestates used, to account for natural variation in nutrient value


Technology is vital to precision farming. You can make better decisions with data from:


  computers
  remote sensors
  satellite guidance and positioning systems


If new technology is too expensive, you can retrofit equipment to existing machinery or use specialist contractors.

Check if you can get funding for new precision fertiliser and manure application equipment.

Where to use precision application

Identify areas at high risk from nutrient losses. You can:


  use MAGIC to check if your land is in a nitrate or phosphate priority area

  complete a runoff and soil erosion risk assessment


High risk areas include fields that are:


  located in a drinking water protection area

  connected to watercourses like streams and ditches
  next to sensitive habitats like Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
  close to neighbouring properties, if you apply material with a strong smell


Deep injection of slurry can mean a high risk of nitrate leaching. It is not suitable for:


  sandy or light soils
  shallow soil over fissured or permeable rock
  cracked or fissured soils, which occur when dry conditions cause soils with a high clay content to shrink and crack


Benefits of precision application

Efficient nutrient use has business benefits. You can:


  save money by reducing the need for artificial fertiliser
  expect better yields from more consistent crop growth and quality


Better placement of slurry or digestates onto or just below the ground surface will:


  reduce crop contamination
  reduce the risk of crop scorch
  improve odour control
  mean you can use it on growing cereal crops
  allow livestock to return to grazing sooner, with less grass rejected


Precision application of inputs will benefit the environment. It can help reduce:


  nutrient (nitrate and phosphate) loss from organic and artificial fertilisers
  runoff of faecal bacteria from biosolids, livestock manures and slurries
  soil compaction, through use of fewer but more accurate machinery routes
  air pollution from ammonia and tiny airborne particles
  greenhouse gas emissions


Fewer nutrients and faecal bacteria in water bodies, wetlands, coastal waters and groundwater helps to protect:


  drinking and bathing waters
  aquatic habitats and species
  shellfish production, like mussels, oysters and clams, making them safer for people to eat


You must follow the farming rules for water. These require you to take steps to stop manure, fertiliser or soil getting into water bodies.

Before you invest in precision application systems and technology

You should match nutrient inputs to crop demand with a nutrient management plan. You can use your plan along with a whole farm nutrient budget.

Look at your current setup and identify:


  what machinery you already have
  your ability to invest
  the level of precision you need
  whether you’ll use liquid or solid materials
  the type of soil
  what crops you grow
  any nearby watercourses or neighbouring properties


Regulatory controls may apply to specific materials. You must follow:


  environmental permit controls
  any landspreading permits

  best practice to use sewage sludge on your land



Get advice before you buy new machinery. Only buy it if you’ll make more money as a result of using it than it costs to buy. You may want to use a specialist contractor who has the equipment you need instead.

You can also get help in planning which precision application system to use. You’ll find this on trade websites, at agricultural shows, from machinery dealers and in the farming press.

Precision application systems and technology

You can alter existing machinery to improve spreading accuracy. This will avoid:


  applying too much or not enough fertiliser or manure
  excess vegetation at field edges or growth of algae in watercourses because of nutrient enrichment
  variable nutrient supply to the crop, which could make a nutrient management plan less precise


Fertiliser spreader calibration

Check your fertiliser spreader at least once a year, and ideally before you use a new type of fertiliser. Use a qualified tester or your own calibration equipment.

There are 2 types of spreader calibration:


  application rate
  spread pattern


Application rate calibration guarantees the correct amount of fertiliser for an area.

You should calibrate the spread pattern each time you use a new fertiliser type in the spreader to:


  make sure you spread the fertiliser evenly, with no overlaps or gaps
  keep the spread pattern the same, even if you use different application rates for the same product


Spread pattern calibration is best done with a tray test to measure any variations in the spread pattern. A ‘coefficient of variation’ (CV) of below 10% means the spreading is even.

Manure spreader calibration

Calibrate manure spreading to determine the application rate and how evenly you apply slurry and solid manure.

The application rate depends on:


  discharge rate
  spread (bout) width
  forward speed


Once you know the available nutrients in the manure, you can alter the forward speed to achieve the correct application rate for each crop. Find out more about spread width.

Global positioning system (GPS)

This satellite-based navigation system:


  helps you cover a field with the spacing you need by showing you where to steer
  gives an even coverage of nutrients by preventing overlapping or underlapping
  allows you to work accurately in the dark
  is useful if you do not have tramlines to follow
  can be combined with assisted steering so you can work hands-free


Sensor system

Sensors produce an electrical signal which a computer uses to control machinery. You can use a sensor system with GPS to apply fertiliser or manure even more accurately.

Variable rate application

You can vary the application rate for different parts of a field to apply the correct amounts of nutrients. You can either pre-programme the application rates or make adjustments while you’re working.

You can retrofit variable rate controls to many slurry, solid manure, or solid and liquid fertiliser spreaders. Check with your equipment manufacturer or dealer.

Fertiliser placement

Fertiliser placement is usually used on high value crops such as vegetables to:


  increase fertiliser efficiency by putting nutrients close to germinating or established crops
  reduce surface exposure of fertiliser and potential losses by runoff


Low-emission liquid manure and digestate placement

You can reduce nutrient waste by spreading liquid manures and digestates close to the ground. Conventional application with a splash plate is affected by wind and relies on the even matching of lapped spreading widths.

Use ‘band spreading’ to put nutrients directly on the soil and reduce ammonia loss.

Apply liquid manures in a series of narrow bands about 5cm wide and 20cm to 30cm apart with either:


  a trailing hose or dribble bar on arable land to fertilise growing crops
  a trailing shoe just below a grass sward or crop canopy


Other band spreading measures include:


  
GPS control to turn off sections of trailing shoe, trailing hose and dribble bar applicators
  pump flow meters and weigh cells for accurate application rates


You can inject liquid manures below the soil surface, before crops establish on arable land.

Use injection to reduce crop contamination and odour emissions. Shallow injection can reduce ammonia losses but deeper injection can stop them.

Shallow injection uses discs to cut slots at 5cm to 10cm depth. You can use it on stone-free, non-sloping grassland.

Deep injection places slurry behind cultivation tines in closed slots at 25cm depth. It can damage growing crops and you should not use it on soils with a high risk of nitrate leaching.

Do not use shallow or deep injection on soils with historic features. Register and request an SFI Historic Environment Farm Environment Record (SFI HEFER) to learn more about historic features on your land.





      
        
    Published 7 June 2021
    Last updated 14 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 December 2021
              Added link to funding options
            
            
              18 August 2021
              Added clarification that this is best practice but not mandatory advice.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Use a whole farm nutrient budget
        Increase soil organic matter
        Reduce grassland management intensity next to watercourses
        Grow legumes in grassland to replace nutrient inputs
        Create and use a nutrient management plan

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Land management
        Wildlife and habitat conservation

  


  

  


    
  


    