. – Today, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) announced up to $125.5 million in new funding to advance solar technology research. Through the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) Solar Energy Technologies Office, DOE continues to advance research and development of solar technologies that reduce the cost of solar, increase the competitiveness of American manufacturing and businesses, and improve the reliability of the grid. “Solar energy has grown tremendously in the last decade,” said U.S. Secretary of Energy Dan Brouillette. “The research and development supported by this investment will build on the technological foundations necessary to continue the solar industry’s growth and preserve American energy choice, independence, and security. These investments directly support the Trump Administration’s all-of-the-above energy strategy.”In addition to today’s solar funding announcement, yesterday EERE announced up to $43.8 million to advance geothermal research and development. These funding opportunity announcements (FOAs), along with a $300 million investment in sustainable transportation made in January 2020, total more than $463 million making this the largest EERE investment made this early in the fiscal year over the past six years.“The Trump Administration continues to expeditiously announce funding opportunities for the growing demand for clean and renewable technologies on the grid,” said Under Secretary of Energy Mark W. Menezes. “Progress made in cybersecurity and grid integration build on previous FOAs, and including new topics to help the agriculture community and folding in AI technologies and machine learning, only help bolster the need for solar technologies now, and in the future.” DOE’s  (SETO 2020) will help to continue the steady decline in solar costs. In addition, projects will tackle key emerging challenges facing the solar industry, including enabling solar and storage, enhancing cybersecurity protections, manufacturing, developing solar-powered microgrids, and siting solar with agriculture.“We’re excited about these new funding opportunities for renewable power, transportation, energy efficiency, and manufacturing,” said Daniel R Simmons, Assistant Secretary of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. “We look forward to working with the National Labs and private sector partners to advance clean, affordable, and reliable energy for American families and businesses.”Funding will support advancements in the following areas:Sign up  to learn more about this funding opportunity at an upcoming webinar.For more information on the Solar Energy Technologies Office, please visit the .###