
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Accessible documents policy
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Cymraeg
        
    
  

  

  
      
  Accessible documents at the Adjudicator’s Office

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          The Adjudicator’s Office

      
      Published
      24 September 2020
      Last updated
      
        24 May 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Using our documents

        
        
          What to do if you can’t use one of our documents

        
        
          How accessible our documents are

        
        
          Reporting accessibility problems with one of our documents

        
        
          Enforcement procedure

        
        
          Technical information about the accessibility of our documents

        
        
          Non-accessible content

        
        
          How we tested our documents

        
        
          What we’re doing to improve accessibility

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This policy explains how accessible the documents the Adjudicator’s Office publishes on GOV.UK are.

It covers PDFs, spreadsheets, presentations and other types of document. It does not cover content published on GOV.UK as HTML, which is covered by the main GOV.UK accessibility statement.

Using our documents
The Adjudicator’s Office publishes documents in a range of formats, including:


  PDF
  Microsoft Word
  Microsoft Excel spreadsheets
  CSV (Comma-Separated Values)
  ODT (OpenDocument Text)


We want as many people as possible to be able to use these documents. For example, when we produce a document we make sure we:


  provide an HTML option where possible
  tag headings and other parts of the document properly, so screen readers can understand the page structure
  make sure we include alt text alongside non-decorative images, so people who can’t see them understand why they’re there
  avoid using tables, except when presenting data
  write in plain English


What to do if you can’t use one of our documents

If you need to access information in one of these document types, you can ask for an alternative format. It will help us if you tell us what assistive technology you use.

How accessible our documents are
New documents we publish, and documents you need to download or fill in to access one of the services we provide, should be fully accessible.

Reporting accessibility problems with one of our documents
We’re always looking to improve the accessibility of our documents. If you find any problems that aren’t listed on this page or you think we’re not meeting accessibility requirements, you can contact us.

Enforcement procedure
The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018 (the ‘accessibility regulations’). If you’re not happy with how we respond to your complaint, contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS), or the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland (ECNI) if you live in Northern Ireland.

Technical information about the accessibility of our documents
The Adjudicator’s Office is committed to making our documents accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

The documents the Adjudicator’s Office publishes are partially compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.1 AA standard, due to the non-compliances listed below.

Non-accessible content
The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Non-compliance with the accessibility regulations

Success criterion 1.1.1: non-text content

Some of our documents have diagrams and/or tables. Some of these do not have a text alternative, so the information in them isn’t available to people using a screen reader. This doesn’t meet WCAG 2.1 success criterion 1.1.1 (non-text content).

We plan to add text alternatives for all diagrams and tables by the end of October 2020. We will ensure they meet accessibility standards.

How we tested our documents
We tested a sample of our documents in August and September 2020. The test was carried out by HMRC’s digital content team.

We tested:


  PDF documents


We decided to test these types of document as they are the main non-HTML formats published by the Adjudicator’s Office.

What we’re doing to improve accessibility

The Adjudicator’s Office is:


  publishing in HTML by default where possible, rather than PDF


We will continue to review and update this policy as our work progresses.





      
        
    Published 24 September 2020
    Last updated 24 May 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 May 2021
              Added Welsh translation
            
            
              24 September 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Complaints and appeals

  


  

  


    
  


    