
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Easy Access Intellectual Property
  

  
  
  
      
  As part of Dstl's commitment to improving access to technologies, we're making some of our intellectual property (IP) available for free. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      5 February 2015
      Last updated
      
        10 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          What is Easy Access IP?

        
        
          Conditions to note

        
        
          
Dstl Easy Access IP Portfolio

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


What is Easy Access IP?

Easy Access IP is a licencing approach formalised by Glasgow University, King’s College London and Bristol University and has seen growing adoption among other UK and foreign universities. Dstl is the first UK government organisation to adopt the Easy Access IP scheme.

Easy Access IP offers certain technologies for free, in combination with a simple licence agreement. There are no licence fees or royalties but licensees will be required to pay for the ongoing patent costs.
For Dstl the scheme offers an opportunity to build relationships within industry and provides a mechanism to release technology to those who may be able to further develop it. For industry it creates an opportunity to commercialise Dstl technologies, but at a reduced risk. It also allows exchange of knowledge between government and external organisations.

Technologies available through Easy Access IP are usually considered to be a low technical readiness for commercialisation; with limited funding this means Dstl are not always able to develop it. The intellectual property available, usually includes patent rights and/or software, but can be other forms of intellectual property too. By offering the licences for free, Dstl is able to see the technology potentially come to market and create an impact.

Conditions to note


  The licensee will need to inform Dstl of their plans to commercialise the technology
  The licensee should ensure they acknowledge the IP was originally developed by Dstl

  The licensee must sign the one page license agreement

  The licensee must pay ongoing patent costs. Dstl can provide indicative costs for patents, which will be invoiced in UK pounds sterling.


Read the full terms and conditions

Easy Access IP is run alongside our primary route for licensing through our technology transfer company, Ploughshare Innovations. For more information on these technologies please visit the Ploughshare Innovations website

If you have any questions or if you would like further information regarding Easy Access IP, please contact the Easy IP mailbox

Watch our short video for more detail.

Accessing Dstl’s intellectual property


Dstl Easy Access IP Portfolio

Antenna technologies


  A protective garment with an antenna


Biomedical technologies

  
    Synthetic model of human skin, for safe testing of chemical decontamination procedures
  
  
    Convenient and ergonomic personal respirator design
  
  
    Decontamination chamber
  


Protection technologies


  Ballistic military helmet, with vents to enable the user to cool down
  Lower Limb AMP Protection


Other

  
    Cyber Card Game
  
  
    Digital Forensic Triage Tool
  
  
    Automated Biometric Identity Management System AIMS
  
  
    Roller Door System
  


Note that Dstl will be happy to discuss licensing of any of its technologies where appropriate, not just the ones listed above.

Next steps
To find out more about the scheme or a particular technology, simply contact us at dstleasyip@dstl.gov.uk.

Useful documents

  Easy Access IP licence agreement
  Easy Access IP terms and conditions






      
        
    Published 5 February 2015
    Last updated 10 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 March 2020
              Removed two case studies which are no longer part of the portfolio
            
            
              16 October 2019
              Added 2 new case studies
            
            
              4 March 2019
              Removal of text.
            
            
              31 May 2018
              New licensing opportunity added: Cyber card game for training
            
            
              20 March 2018
              New factsheets uploaded
            
            
              27 September 2017
              Three new Easy Access IP technologies available for licence added
            
            
              16 June 2017
              Some details in the Dstl Easy Access IP Portfolio updated
            
            
              3 November 2015
              Respirator technology added.
            
            
              1 September 2015
              Updated with new technology: Deployable radio antenna
            
            
              9 July 2015
              Added 2 new technologies: Instantaneous compact-wideband antenna and A compact wideband antenna.
            
            
              6 July 2015
              Added new Easy Access IP technology: synthetic skin
            
            
              9 February 2015
              Added video on Easy Access IP
            
            
              5 February 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        National security
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    