
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Incident manager
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what an incident manager does and the skills you need to do the job.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of incident manager

        
        
          Incident manager

        
        
          Major incident manager

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This describes the role of incident manager and the skills required, including:


  an introduction to the role, telling you what you would do in this role and the full list of skills
  a description of the levels in this role, from incident manager to major incident manager, specifying the skills you need for each level and the corresponding skill level (awareness, working, practitioner, expert)


This role is part of the Digital, Data and Technology Profession in the Civil Service.

Introduction to the role of incident manager

Incident managers aim to restore normal service operation as quickly as possible and minimise any adverse effect on business operations. This makes sure that the best possible levels of service quality and availability are returned and maintained.

Skills required to be an incident manager

You will need the following skills for this role, although the level of expertise for each will vary, depending on the role level.


  
Asset and configuration management. You know how to conduct life-cycle management for assets including hardware, software, intellectual property, licences and warranties. You know how to manage usage, disposal, compliance, inventory, sustainability, cost optimisation and protection of the asset portfolio. You can help to improve investment decisions and capitalise on opportunities. You know how to comply with international standards for asset management. You document information relating to assets including identification, classification and specification of all items, and information related to storage, access, versions, etc. You can apply status accounting and auditing in line with relevant criteria.
  
Availability and capacity management. You can define, analyse, plan, forecast, measure, maintain and improve all aspects of the availability of services, including power. You know how to control and manage service availability to meet the needs of the business in a cost-effective manner, including managing the capability, functionality and sustainability of service components (including hardware, software, network resources and software/infrastructure as a service).
  
Change management. You can manage changes to service, configuration items, organisational change, supplier change and associated documentation. You know how to request changes in response to incidents or problems that provide effective control and reduction of risk to the security performance and availability. You can ensure compliance of the business services impacted by the change. You understand policy, principles and approach. You can apply your understanding and knowledge in project or programme activities and can develop experience in the use of relevant change management tools and processes.
  
Community collaboration. You can contribute to the work of the community, building successful teams through understanding team styles and influencing as well as motivating team members. You know how to give and receive constructive feedback, facilitating the feedback loop. You can facilitate conflict resolution within teams, ensure the team is transparent and that the work is understood externally. You can help teams maintain a focus on delivery while being aware of the importance of professional development.
  
Continual service improvement. You can identify and explore opportunities for service and business improvement. You know how to drive analysis and identify, prioritise and implement improvements and efficiencies, ensuring that the organisation derives maximum value from services This includes recognising the potential for automation of processes, determining costs and benefits of new approaches and managing change or assisting implementation where needed.
  
Continuity management. You can provide service continuity planning and support. This includes identification of information, systems that support critical business processes, the assessment of risks to those systems’ availability, integrity and confidentiality and the coordination of planning, designing, testing and maintenance procedures and contingency plans to address exposures and maintain agreed levels of continuity.
  
Incident management. You can coordinate the response to incident reports, ensuring relevant prioritisation and detail to allow effective investigation. You can identify the correct procedures or channels for resolution and monitor resolution activity and progress updates to customers. You understand the relevant change management tools and processes.
  
Ownership and initiative. You can take ownership of problems and proactively resolve technical problems, ensuring that technical solutions continue to meet business requirements. You know how to take full accountability for actions taken and decisions made.
  
Problem management. You can understand and identify problems, analysing and helping to identify the appropriate solution. You can classify and prioritise problems, document their causes and implement remedies.
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You have an in-depth understanding of Service Management Framework principles and processes and the ability to apply your technical knowledge in project or programme activities.
  
Service focus. You can maintain focus on the whole life of service delivery: from designing to developing to delivering and operating. You know how to ensure that a set of IT products, suppliers and vendors come together to deliver an IT service.
  
Technical understanding. This knowledge underpins your ability to deliver the responsibilities and tasks for the role and ensures that you can apply the breadth and depth of technical knowledge you need. You stay abreast of industry developments to make cost-effective use of new and emerging tools and technologies.
  
User focus. You understand users and can identify who they are and what their needs are, based on evidence. You can translate user stories and propose design approaches or services to meet these needs. You can engage in meaningful interactions and relationships with users.You put users first and can manage competing priorities.


Incident manager

An incident manager oversees incidents and restores normal operations as quickly as possible with the least impact on the business or the user.

At this level, you will be expected to:


  work on-site, maintaining the hardware and fixing technical problems as quickly as possible
  provide first time resolution by troubleshooting, diagnosing or escalating faults to the major incident managers and problem managers to investigate and resolve, or both
  coach apprentices and share knowledge with team colleagues


Your responsibilities may, in some departments, mirror those of an end user computing engineer.

Skills needed for this role


  
Asset and configuration management. You can track, log and correct information to protect assets and components. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Availability and capacity management. You know about availability and capacity management processes. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Change management. You can implement changes based on requests for change. You know how to apply change control procedures. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Community collaboration. You can contribute to the work of others while having the ability to motivate and empower teams. You know how to create the right environment for teams to work in and can facilitate the best team make-up depending on the situation. You can recognise and deal with issues. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Continual service improvement. You know about developing process efficiency and common ways in which processes are optimised. You can support specific activities to improve development processes. You can spot or identify obvious deficiencies. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Continuity management. You know about the IT standard continuity management processes and procedures. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Incident management. You can diagnose and prioritise incidents, investigating their causes and finding resolutions. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Ownership and initiative. You can own an issue until a new owner has been found or the problem has been mitigated or resolved. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Problem management. You can initiate and monitor actions to investigate patterns and trends to resolve problems, including consulting specialists where required. You can determine the appropriate remedy and assist with implementation of it as well as preventative measures. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You have a Level 3 Service Management Framework qualification. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Service focus. You can take inputs and establish coherent frameworks that work. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Technical understanding. You know about the subject matter and have an understanding of what it involves. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
User focus. You can identify needs and engage with users or stakeholders to collate user needs evidence. You understand and can define research that fits user needs. You can use quantitative and qualitative data about users to turn user focus into outcomes. (Relevant skill level: working)


Major incident manager

A major incident manager manages significant outages and crises and reports issues to problem management. At this level, you will be expected to work closely with workplace services, infrastructure, applications operators and communication managers. In some departments, you may also be the head of service.

Skills needed for this role


  
Asset and configuration management. You can track, log and correct information to protect assets and components. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Availability and capacity management. You know how to manage service components to ensure they meet business needs and performance targets. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Change management. You can analyse and assess impact, and develop and document change requests. You can implement changes based on requests for change. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Community collaboration. You know how to work collaboratively within a group, actively networking with others and varying feedback for the appropriate time to ensure the discussion sticks. You can use your initiative to identify problems or issues in the team dynamic and rectify them. You can pull out issues through agile health-checks with the team to provoke the right responses. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Continual service improvement. You can identify process optimisation opportunities with guidance and contribute to the implementation of proposed solutions. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Continuity management. You know how to manage the runbooks for service continuity. This includes managing the processes around service continuity and testing the runbooks to ensure that service availability can be maintained in any event. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Incident management. You can lead the investigation and resolution of incidents. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Ownership and initiative. You can take accountability of issues that occur and be proactive in searching for potential problems. You know how to achieve excellent user outcomes. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Problem management. You can initiate and monitor actions to investigate patterns and trends to resolve problems, including consulting specialists where required. You can determine the appropriate remedy and assist with implementation of it as well as preventative measures. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You have a Level 3 Service Management Framework qualification. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Service focus. You know how to see the bigger picture and can investigate how to get the best of underlying services. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Technical understanding. You understand core technical concepts related to the role and can apply them with guidance. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
User focus. You know how to collaborate with user researchers and can represent users internally. You understand the difference between user needs and the desires of the user. You can champion user research to focus on all users. You can prioritise and define approaches to understand the user story, guiding others in doing so. You can offer recommendations on the best tools and methods to be used. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs






      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Technical architect
        Quality Assurance Testing (QAT) analyst
        End user computing engineer
        Security architect
        Development operations (DevOps) engineer

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    