Industry forecasts show that the Swiss energy system is expected to face a growing energy-supply gap in the decades to come. Given the dynamics of the country’s energy-producing industries, utilities and power providers will likely need to increase imports from other countries, such as France. While this may be easy in theory—Switzerland acts as a major hub of power flows—it will not be easy in practice. All matter of hurdles, from evolving regulations to changing energy sources, must first be overcome.Switzerland currently relies on hydro and nuclear power to meet the bulk of its energy demand. However, it’s unlikely that a reduction in expected energy consumption and a buildup of domestic renewables would suffice to fill the energy-supply gap, which could potentially begin as early as 2030. The gap could be further widened by an accelerated decarbonization agenda, which would see higher shares of electric vehicles (EVs) on the road and increased production of hydrogen by electrolysis. Additional challenges include the growth of renewables, a higher share of intermittent electricity, a limitation on imports, and a potential peak demand-supply gap.On January 27, 2021, the Federal Council adopted Switzerland’s long-term climate strategy 2050, an energy act made up of ten strategic principles to guide the country’s climate policy in the years to come. The act focuses on the energy sector and outlines four potential pathways for Switzerland to meet its increasing power-supply needs while achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 and maintaining high energy security.The following article outlines four potential pathways that could enable Switzerland to meet its increasing power-supply needs by focusing on the role of the electric grid, factoring in the economic and regulatory feasibility and the time required for implementation.The Swiss power sector—as well as the broader European energy system—features a relatively stable equilibrium, with loads having been mostly flat for the past ten years. While the energy production mix in Europe is slowly changing from fossil-fuel plants to renewable-power plants, the electricity mix in Switzerland has been nearly carbon-free for decades. In fact, more than 60 percent of Switzerland’s annual energy generation stems from hydropower, with the remaining share of the mix mostly generated by nuclear.That said, the Swiss energy system is expected to change rapidly in the years to come. The country plans to phase out its remaining nuclear capacity by 2044. Further, Switzerland is a central European hub for power transmission and therefore highly interconnected with the electric grid. In 2019, the country imported, exported, and transitioned around 40 TWh of electricity, with up to 60 percent of total produced power exported in the summer and the same share imported in the winter.This high level of interconnection makes Switzerland dependent on power-market developments and regulations on a European level. On this point, the expected power-market evolution is likely to result in an increasing gap between supply and demand; electricity demand could increase by up to 30 percent by 2050 (46 percent if power demand for green hydrogen is included). With the potential for increased reliance on hydropower somewhat limited, and the construction of nuclear power plants prohibited since 2016, it’s likely that additional capacity won’t close this gap—at least not in a trivial way. When the Swiss electorate voted in favor of Energy Strategy 2050, the correct approach to balancing supply and demand had not yet been determined. Finding this correct approach is complicated by the ambitious Swiss decarbonization targets; the Swiss Federal Council targets net-zero emissions by 2050. While solar and wind can potentially help resolve this issue, imports are increasingly likely to play a key role. However, an increase in imports comes with the following challenges:Based on forecasts drawn from various scenarios (see sidebar, “Four scenarios for navigating the energy transition”), Switzerland could become a net energy importer by 2030 and gradually increase its imports thereafter—a significant change from the current status quo in which Switzerland is a small net exporter. This change will be primarily driven by an increase in power demand. Of note, both the reference case and the accelerated case are initially more than the “zero basis” scenario of the long-term climate strategy 2050. The reference case calls for a 16 percent increase by 2035. Over the long term, however, only the accelerated case is more than Swiss projections. Here, the reference case calls for an increase of 46 percent by 2050, and the close in the gap occurs around 2045 (Exhibit 1).The growth in Swiss electricity demand is a result of increased electrification across sectors as well as the slowly emerging share of hydrogen in the energy mix (Exhibit 2). The largest portion of growth comes from the transport sector, in which a strong uptake of EVs is driven by improved economics, favorable regulations, and technology readiness. By 2035, 50 percent of vehicles sales in all segments except trucks are expected to be electric. After 2035, however, the truck segment is forecasted to see a large uptake of EVs, especially for long-haul trucks powered by hydrogen fuel cells. In addition, electrification in buildings (such as uptake of heat pumps) will be offset by efficiency gains, and industry will see electrification only as it relates to small- and medium-heat processes in industries such as manufacturing (consumer goods) and agriculture (drying or processing crops).The largest capacity addition will likely come from solar photovoltaics (PV), which could add approximately 14 gigawatts (GW) of additional capacity by 2050. This is due both to solar PV’s lower levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) compared with wind and the potential offered by Switzerland’s topography (Exhibit 3). While the current societal and political consensus presents regulatory challenges to the large-scale construction of utility-scale solar PV and wind turbines, there remains significant potential for rooftop solar PV.Even with the anticipated net capacity additions, Switzerland will face a gap between demand and supply (Exhibit 4). This gap could become apparent as early as 2030 with the decrease of nuclear power and continue to increase as demand rises faster than electricity generation from new power sources.All this said, becoming a net importer raises several questions for utilities and power providers and operators, such as what amount of capacity is feasible, both in terms of availability in the EU market and grid capacity. Determining this requires an understanding of the long-term plans of neighboring countries, as well as the EU in general. The economic implications must also be taken into consideration, such as the direct cost of power and the potential for job creation. There is also the question of security of supply and the associated challenges, both in terms of political implications in the broader EU context and the local determination across cantons (the states of the Swiss confederation).Finally, an increased dependency on imports will in turn cause the generation model on a broader European level to become increasingly focused on specific countries, resulting in higher cross-border transmission flows (Exhibit 5). Both exports and imports are increasing in magnitude for most countries compared with 2020 as both intra- and interday fluctuations are balanced out.A core concept of Switzerland’s long-term climate strategy for 2050 is that an increase in energy efficiency will enable the country to cope with an increasing domestic-supply shortage, underscoring the need to determine whether current plans and expectations are sufficient to meet the energy demand going forward. In prior instances, when countries faced similar situations (or even under unique circumstances, such as the one experienced in Texas during the 2021 winter storm) the effects were focused on the short term, such as load shedding or a spike in power prices. However, as industries are allocated peak demand slots, the impact can be consequential on a country’s long-term economic stability.With this in mind, the following four potential pathways can enable an emission-free Swiss power supply able to meet increasing future demand:* * *
Today, in the face of increased social and regulatory pressures, an accelerated decarbonization agenda is all but required for both countries and power providers. Although Switzerland will need to overcome unique challenges in closing its impending energy-supply gap, the country will also be presented with unique opportunities. There’s no time to waste. Making the right moves based on the needs of the energy system is the best bet for protecting the country’s long-term economic stability.  is a consultant in the Zurich office, where  is a partner and  is a senior partner;  is an associate partner in the Geneva office; and  is a consultant in the Düsseldorf office.The authors wish to thank Nikolay Avkhimovich, Cristina Blajin, Thomas Geissman, Jesse Noffsinger, Joscha Schabram, and Philip Witte for their contributions to this article.