Cambridge, MA – Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs has named  a non-resident Fellow with the .  Mr. Kim recently retired as a senior intelligence officer from the Central Intelligence Agency after 28 years of service.  He helped secure the foundation for the Singapore Summit between President Donald Trump and Chairman Kim Jong Un in June 2018.  “We are very fortunate to have Andy join us as a Fellow at Harvard’s Belfer Center,” said , Korea Project Director.  “His national security leadership experience will help us in advancing innovative policy research initiatives and mentoring the next generation of practitioners and scholars in the Korean security studies field.”“I am very excited to join the Belfer Center and gain opportunities to collaborate with well-respected scholars and experts,” said Mr. Kim.  “I am also looking forward to contributing to the university by sharing the knowledge and experience I have gained over the years as a practitioner.” Mr. Kim established the CIA’s Korea Mission Center in April 2017 in response to a presidential initiative to address North Korea’s longstanding threat to global security.  As the head of the Korea Mission Center, he managed and guided CIA Korea analysts in providing strategic and tactical analytic products for a range of policymakers.  Mr. Kim also held the Associate Deputy Director of CIA for Operations/Technology position.  In this capacity, he led and orchestrated all efforts to update their operational technology and incorporated state-of-the-art doctrine into CIA training curricula.  Mr. Kim, who served as the Chief of CIA Station in three major East Asian cities, managed the collection, analysis, production, and distribution of information that directly affected national security.  In recognition of his many contributions, CIA honored Mr. Kim with the Director’s Award (2018), Presidential Rank Award (2012), and the Donovan Award (1990).  He speaks fluent Korean, Japanese, and Mandarin Chinese.