
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Government Analysis Career Framework
  

  
  

  
    
  The Government Analysis Career Framework gives information on the analytical roles available across government.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Analysis Function

      
      Published
      1 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        6 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Government Analysis Career Framework - PDF version
    
        PDF, 13.6MB, 118 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email analysis.function@ons.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Government Analysis Function Career Framework - HTML version
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Career Stories
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Role profiles and career paths
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This framework is for anyone interested or already working in government analysis.

New for Spring 2021
Analysis Function Senior Civil Service (SCS) Capability Framework - The Analysis Function SCS Capability Framework has been developed through consultation with a range of professions and senior analysts from across government.



        
      

      
    Published 1 April 2020
    Last updated 6 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 August 2021
              Added accessible HTML versions of the framework broken up into three attachments for the main framework, the career stories and the role profiles. Revised the landing page text to remove the content that lives in the HTML versions of the framework.
            
            
              7 April 2021
              New information added about the Career Framework
            
            
              1 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Data scientist
        Government Analysis Function SCS Capability Framework
        Government Geography Profession - Career Framework
        Data analyst
        Introduction to artificial intelligence in government course

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    