
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Cost Estimating Guidance
  

  
  

  
    
  This guidance sets out a best practice approach to the development of cost estimates for infrastructure projects and programmes in the UK.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Infrastructure and Projects Authority

      
      Published
      17 March 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Cost Estimating Guidance
    
        PDF, 3.35MB, 44 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ipa@ipa.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Cost Estimating Guidance
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Cost Estimating Requirements
    
        PDF, 1.6MB, 46 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ipa@ipa.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Applying the IPA’s priorities of principles, people and performance this document covers:


  Principles for best practice cost estimating outlining the fundamentals that underpin a good cost estimate to get the basics right and address common pitfalls
  Roles and responsibilities in producing, reviewing and owning the cost estimate to make informed decisions
  Cost estimating process that should be followed to produce a robust, assured and transparent cost estimates which can be used with confidence to support successful delivery.


This guidance document is part of a suite of documents, including:


  Cost estimating guidance – setting out a best practice approach to cost estimation for all team members
  Cost estimating requirements – a technical guide setting out the detailed requirements for cost estimating teams and professionals to produce and assure cost estimates
  Training – to support professional development and promote the adoption of consistent methods


It is targeted at those involved in the sponsorship, leadership and delivery of projects to support better quality project cost estimates and improved decision making.



        
      

      
    Published 17 March 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Benchmarking Capability Tool
        Transport infrastructure efficiency strategy
        Transport infrastructure efficiency strategy: one year on
        Best Practice in Benchmarking
        Case study: Benchmarking tunnelling costs and production rates in the UK

  




      

    Collection

  


        Improving infrastructure delivery and performance

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Major project management

  


  

  


    
  


    