
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pathways: Statistical Analysis
  

  
  
  
      
  Government Analysis Function Learning Pathway, highlighting a route through learning focusing on statistical analysis.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Analysis Function

      
      Published
      1 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Statistical Analysis

        
        
          Persona

        
        
          Summary

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Statistical Analysis


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Description

Statistics is the fun of finding patterns in data; the pleasure of making discoveries; the import of deep philosophical questions; the power to shed light on important decisions, and the ability to guide decisions in business, science, government, medicine and industry. This pathway prepares you for practical statistical analysis by providing a strong conceptual understanding of tools and processes involved in analysing data using various techniques from Regression to Bayesian analysis.

Learning Objectives


  Understand the key concepts and practices used within statistics.
  Demonstrate the ability to use tools and technology to manipulate data and perform statistical analysis.
  Explain and interpret the statistical model created using industry standard tools and technologies.


Length

This pathway contains four courses.

Persona

To help decide if this is the pathway for you, this learning persona is designed to create a realistic representation of the intended learning audience.



General Background

Grace has been working in an analytical role for 12 months.

Starting Point

Grace recently completed the Data Quality Pathway and is keen to take her learning further.

Perceived Needs

Grace has completed the prerequisite courses and is interested in exploring techniques to facilitate data analysis.

Special Considerations

Grace prefers the structure of a trainer-led course but would also like to have some self-study time due the demands of her role.

Summary

This pathway prepares you for practical statistical analysis by providing a strong conceptual understanding of tools and processes involved in analysing data using various techniques from Regression to Bayesian analysis.


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Back to Analytical Learning Pathways page.




      
        
    Published 1 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pathways: Text Analysis
        Pathways: Data Visualisation
        Pathways: Managing Data
        Pathways: Communicating Insight
        Pathways: Analytical Awareness for Non-Analysts

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    