
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Energy Technology List (ETL): information for manufacturers
  

  
  

  
    
  Factsheet from the Carbon Trust for manufacturers of energy-saving products who want their products to qualify for the Energy Technology List.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      8 December 2014
      Last updated
      
        1 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Key information for manufacturers: ETL factsheet
    
        PDF, 296KB, 5 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Information for manufacturers, including how to:


  register on the ETL to make product applications
  update your contact details on the ETL



There is additional information for manufacturers of lighting, pipework insulation, automatic monitoring and targeting systems sub-metering systems, Air to Air Heat Pumps, Split, Multi-Split and VRF, and CHP.




        
      

      
    Published 8 December 2014
    Last updated 1 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 April 2020
              On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the ECA and First Year Tax Credits Scheme (FYTC) will end from April 2020 for products on the ETL. This ETL publication has been updated to remove references to the ECA.
            
            
              24 August 2018
              Updated to reflect changes to the ETL criteria.
            
            
              21 October 2016
              Updated guidance
            
            
              8 December 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Energy Technology List (ETL): information for purchasers
        Energy Technology List (ETL) new technology proposal form
        Product application for inclusion on the Energy Technology List (ETL)
        Energy Technology List (ETL) product testing framework
        Energy Technology List (ETL)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy
        Business and the environment

  


  

  


    
  


    