
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Prison Leavers Project: improving outcomes for prison leavers
  

  
  
  
      
  A cross-government project that will work with service users and stakeholders to test innovative ways to improve social inclusion of people leaving prison, and reduce reoffending.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      8 February 2021
      Last updated
      
        13 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          1. Cross-sector teams

        
        
          2. Local Leadership and Integration Fund

        
        
          3. Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Shared Outcomes Fund (SOF) was set up to test innovative ways of working across the public sector and drive the modernisation of public service, with an emphasis on thorough plans for evaluation. £20 million of the SOF has been awarded to the Prison Leavers Project.

The Ministry of Justice are leading this cross-government project and will be working closely with service users and across organisational boundaries to develop solutions to the key challenges prison leavers face.

The project will bring innovation into the reducing reoffending challenge and build robust evidence on what works, by rapidly developing and testing multiple interventions at a small scale, before scaling up the most effective over time. This work is part of the government’s £220 million package to reduce crime. The Prison Leavers Project will compliment this work, by addressing a wider range of user needs and making their impact more sustainable.

There are 3 distinct parts to the Prison Leavers Project, each testing a different approach:


  Cross-sector teams
  Local Leadership and Integration Fund
  Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge


1. Cross-sector teams
The project is establishing 4 teams made of up colleagues from across the public and third sector to co-design and test innovative pilots with service users. The teams will focus on 4 key areas of challenge for prison leavers:


  health and wellbeing
  the day of release from prison
  community and relationships
  employability and skills


2. Local Leadership and Integration Fund
The Ministry of Justice is launching a grant funding scheme to support the development of locally-led pilots which aims to improve the outcomes of prison leavers. The Local Leadership and Integration Fund will fund local partnerships to improve services in their area.

The Local Leadership and Integration Fund is worth £7.1 million in total, which is split between two rounds of competition (both of which have now closed). The maximum grant award per bid is £1 million.

The local partnerships that will be funded under Round 2 are set to be announced in the new year.

Round 1: Local Leadership and Integration Fund
The solutions to many of the issues facing prison leavers are specific to their local area. Improving outcomes for prison leavers therefore requires a tailored approach that accounts for the local context and builds on the expertise and experience of local leaders.

The Local Leadership and Integration Fund focuses specifically on local systems leadership. It provides grant funding and support to empower local leaders and agencies to improve join-up of services and find innovative ways to work together towards shared outcomes. In doing so, the project hopes to learn more about what works to reduce reoffending at a local level and find new approaches to improve the outcomes in prison leavers, which in time can be scaled up and help shape future policy.

Following the first round of the competition, we have now awarded funding to the following partnerships:


  Bounce Back: Aims to reduce reoffending in London by providing holistic interventions focused on Black, Asian and minority ethnic prison leavers, including resettlement planning, culturally informed rehabilitation interventions and employment support.
  Catch22: Aims to reduce reoffending in London through interventions focused on lowering breaches of licence conditions and recalls, through identifying prison leavers who are at risk of recall, providing support in custody and in the community, and a structured alternative to recall.
  Change, Grow, Live (Cheshire): Aims to reduce crime in Cheshire by providing accommodation and support to prison leavers with substance misuse needs.
  Change, Grow, Live (Midlands): Aims to reduce reoffending in the West Midlands, by providing tailored training to young prison leavers with experience of the care system focused on increasing their ability to live independently, as well as linking them into a community network and peer support.
  The Innovation Unit: Aims to reduce reoffending in the West Midlands by coordinating statutory and personal support networks around young prison leavers with care experience to plan their resettlement; help them live independently and create a support network.
  NEPACS: Aims to reduce reoffending in young male prison leavers in County Durham with experience of the care system. Using trauma informed interventions, the pilot will focus on increasing their support network, ability to manage independent living, and literacy skills.
  New Futures Network/Antz Junction: Aims to reduce reoffending in the North West by increasing training, employment opportunities and delivering ongoing support for prison leavers and local employers through partnerships that create real work environments within prisons.



Read more in the Prison Leavers Project blog


3. Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge

The Prison Leavers Project is working with dynamic organisations such as start-ups and SMEs to develop and pilot new digital or technological solutions to improve outcomes for prison leavers.


Find out more about the Challenge





      
        
    Published 8 February 2021
    Last updated 13 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 July 2021
              Information about which partnerships funding has been awarded to.
            
            
              8 February 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge: FAQs
        Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law
        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    