
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Space to Innovate Campaign - Alpha Drop
  

  
  

  
    
  This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) campaign seeks proposals for novel and innovative future space technologies.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Ministry of Defence, and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      16 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        28 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Space to Innovate Campaign - Alpha Drop: Competition Document
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Space to Innovate Campaign - Alpha Drop: ISC Terms
    
        PDF, 265KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Space to Innovate Campaign - Alpha Drop: ISC Schedules
    
        PDF, 380KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) Space Programme is seeking proposals that can aid UK Defence and Security to develop future space technologies. We are looking for innovative solutions that can address a series of challenges released in “drops” throughout 2021 and 2022. These challenges follow the output of various DASA space themed activities; including Space to Innovate Phase 1 and the International Space Pitch Day.

The amount available for this campaign up to 31 March 2023 is expected to be £2m. This “campaign” approach enables varied contract values and durations to be undertaken as part of the competition, which provides larger and longer contracts for more mature technologies, whilst also enabling less mature innovations to be explored.

Challenge drops will be open to applications from all innovators and not just those that submitted successful bids in previous ones. Any queries should be sent to accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 16 June 2021
    Last updated 28 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 July 2021
              Edited competition document - addition of '9. Clarification questions'.
            
            
              15 July 2021
              Text added for Q&A from the 'Your Questions Answered' event on 29 June 2021.
            
            
              8 July 2021
              'Edited 'What your proposal must include' - clarification that participation in trails are not a requirement of the contract and do not need to be detailed in proposal submissions.'
            
            
              16 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    