
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Radioactive substances regulation (RSR): objective and principles
  

  
  

  
    
  The fundamental objective of radioactive substances regulation and the 10 regulatory principles we apply when carrying out our work. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Environment Agency

      
      Published
      1 December 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Radioactive substances regulation (RSR): objective and principles
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The RSR objective and principles are a statement of the:


  fundamental objective of our regulation
  regulatory principles that we apply when carrying out our work


We have a specific RSR objective because the regulation of radioactive substances is different to other aspects of environmental regulation. RSR is a goal-setting regime based on the work of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP).

The RSR objective and principles:


  guide our decision-making
  provide transparency to permit holders
  give confidence to stakeholders
  enable the RSR function to play its part in achieving the Environment Agency’s strategic goals


The RSR objective and principles in this document have replaced the RSR fundamental principles set out in our 2009 publication ‘Radioactive Substances Regulation – Environmental Principles, Regulatory Guidance Series, No RSR 1’. We have withdrawn this publication.

RSR 1 also contained generic developed principles on a wide range of topics. These are still part of our current guidance and we have published these separately in our document RSR generic developed principles: regulatory assessment.

We are reviewing and updating RSR guidance and plan to incorporate these generic developed principles into other topic-specific guidance as we carry out this review.

We have also withdrawn the generic developed principles on regulatory process that were in RSR 1. They are no longer part of our current guidance.



        
      

      
    Published 1 December 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        RSR generic developed principles: regulatory assessment
        RSR: environmental permit application forms
        Part RSR-B3: apply for an open sources and radioactive waste nuclear site permit
        RSR permits for nuclear licensed sites: how to comply
        Category 5 sealed radioactive sources: how to comply with your standard rules environmental permit

  




      

    Collection

  


        Non-nuclear radioactive substances regulation: technical guidance
        Nuclear sites radioactive substances regulation: technical guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Environmental permits

  


  

  


    
  


    