
        
        
        
     business and technological forces already required organizations to manage change and make decisions more quickly than ever before. The pandemic has vastly intensified those needs. Never have companies of all sizes felt so much pressure to make their business models fit changing requirements. And the need for speed won’t be temporary—digitization, globalization, automation, analytics, and the other forces of change will go on accelerating too. It’s been said that “The pace of change has never been this fast, yet it will never be this slow again.” That quip dates from 2018 but is even more apt now.



	
To survive and thrive in this more volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous world, leading companies are reaping significant benefits by  at scale. Enterprise agility reimagines an organization as a collection of high-performing teams, each with a clear purpose and the skills it needs. In the early days of agility, these teams—often called squads, combining developers, testers, data analysts, customer-journey specialists, and user-interface designers—played their biggest roles in the digital corners of companies. But similar models have now been launched across the whole spectrum of business and technology. Retailers use squads built around specific product categories (for example, fresh food) to drive volume and margin. Telecom providers ask squads to simplify products. Mining companies make their operations safer and more efficient by empowering squads across operations, maintenance, and engineering. These are just three of countless examples. Companies across industries are moving from efforts to optimize their performance within siloed functions to capturing the value between them.These teams must all have the same direction, or the organizations that rely on them fall apart. At an enterprise level, the connective tissue—the stable backbone—consists, for example, of a 90-day , a , “chapters” (that is, groupings of employees with similar functional backgrounds) responsible for consistency, a longer-term vision for specific functional areas, and . When companies (such as , , and TDC) scale up to hundreds of teams, these enterprise-level elements of unity become extremely important. that agile companies have outperformed others in adapting to COVID-19. By examining their priorities and using practices such as objectives and key results (OKRs), they have speeded up their work and adapted to new industry landscapes. The weekly and daily rhythm of agile teams has worked well in remote settings. Tools for tracking performance and health give leaders a sense of how well and quickly things are happening and where to pay more attention (exhibit). 
    
There’s no perfect timeOrganizations going agile must reimagine themselves around customer journeys, products, and other axes of value creation. Typically, this means transitioning from multilayered functional organizations into simpler forms, often with just three layers, as in the case of . Besides changing the structure, agile organizations must change their processes and people models and, often, decentralize their technology by making business units responsible for it.These changes across the operating model—structure, process, people, and technology–can seem scary in the middle of a worldwide pandemic. Meanwhile, the pressure on businesses to transform themselves so that they capture the next wave of productivity, speed, customer-engagement, and employee-engagement benefits keeps mounting. Of course, most organizations would prefer to transform themselves under quieter conditions, but many realize that such times may never return. Some leaders also see positive forces at play now, since the turbulence has made it easier to challenge the status quo and to reinvent the way work is done.

	




    
    

Companies that made it workFor such executives, we have distilled the lessons learned from the experience of four large companies across the globe—teleoperators in Latin America and in Europe, a European insurance company, and a global sports-apparel manufacturer. All four have transformed themselves by adopting agile operating models during the past few months. All had clear plans to do so before the global pandemic but none had prepared for it in advance. Despite the challenges and the temptation to press the pause button, they all decided to move full speed ahead because they realized that the benefits of agility would be more valuable now than ever.An agile accelerator in a Latin American telecomBefore the pandemic, a large telecom company in Latin America had spent months preparing to restructure parts of its operations as an agile accelerator: a 250-person unit comprising 25 cross-functional teams, each with clear business objectives—digital initiatives, customer journeys, and products. COVID-19 struck just as the company was finalizing the design and gearing up for intensive training sessions. The top team quickly realized that it would have to reduce the accelerator’s budget and that more than half of the squads would need to rethink their objectives given the sudden changes in the
market. Of course, the lockdown meant that all plans for in-person training and launch events were now utterly useless.What to do? Stopping the launch would injure the company’s confidence. It would also mean that the existing, relatively slow-moving organization would have to lead the response to COVID-19. The company decided to move ahead with a modified version of the original plan—one that stressed its underlying principles.
    
    
    
The company learned this truth the hard way. To get hundreds of people to work together in remote big-room sessions, it first centralized the management of dependencies (things that had to happen before other things could). That worked poorly because it not only caused delays but also relied on frequently erroneous second-hand information. What worked better was to give squads more time to manage interdependencies among themselves and to collaborate organically. The center provided visibility (through a shared board) and urgency (through a time line).Enterprise agility in a European telecomA telecom company in Europe had achieved good results from a number of agile units for years when it decided to scale up its agile workforce to 4,000 people, from the current 400. The journey began in late 2019, and the plan was slated to go live in April 2020. The company also announced restructuring measures to become more effective by using agile methods and to provide new digital services.Just days before all nominations to appoint people to new roles and new structures were to be confirmed, COVID-19 hit Europe. The company postponed the launch by one month in the increasingly futile hope that some degree of reopening would be possible, so redundancy discussions could take place face-to-face rather than remotely. It also wanted to run some training and launch events in person, though in smaller settings than the boot camps originally planned for thousands of people at a time.As COVID-19 kept advancing, the top team realized it would need to do the whole “flip” remotely. This had three key elements:
    
    
    
All-in agile at a European insurance companyIn 2020, a large European insurance company that had experimented with agile IT and digital teams for years decided to turn the head office into a fully agile operation: products, marketing, data, digital, actuaries, customer journeys, pricing, and so on. In the new organization, people would work in cross-functional teams responsible for the longer-term performance of products and journeys and for quarterly OKRs.Halfway through the design effort, the company had to switch to fully remote work, so the remaining design sessions were virtual. The company also had to decide how it would start the transition journey for 1,000 members of agile teams, 20 newly hired and to-be-trained agile coaches, ten “tribe leaders” (unit leaders), 100 product owners, and 100 “chapter leaders” (functional people leaders). It decided to proceed full speed ahead with a remote launch and to create a virtual academy for building capabilities at scale.
    
    
    

    
Frontrunner in a global apparel companyWhen an iconic sporting-goods and apparel brand decided to embark on a large-scale agile transformation, it launched its first effort, or frontrunner (a unit with ten cross-functional squads) in the logistics and operations function. It aimed to rethink the value chain from the customer backward rather than work through siloed organizations that managed their parts of the supply chain in a far from optimal way. The first teams were onboarding and training when COVID-19 forced the company to rethink the launch. Instead of delaying it, the leadership decided to go forward in the belief that speeding up the pace of change in the supply chain would now be more valuable than ever.Three months into the effort, this bold choice has already paid off. Sales bounced back rapidly, and engagement among team members is high. Several principles (later applied to other teams) made this success possible:
    
    
    
Launching transformations in turbulent timesThese four examples around the world show that organizations can change their operating model even when they must work remotely in volatile times—and as we have seen, some argue that volatile times will never depart. Will the sailing be smooth? No, but an agile transformation never is. It’s true that companies must now consider more issues about how they will run the transformation, but these problems can be solved or at least ameliorated. Companies considering a large-scale transformation in turbulent times must think about four important issues:
    
    
    
    
As you begin to chart your course to agility, the global situation and local or regional conditions will change each and every day. To keep your transformation on track, make sure you have a clear vision of the end goal and of the benefits you seek. Do not approach this as an exercise in remote ways of working. To create a great organization that’s fit for the future, keep your sights higher.