
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 2: sponsor a worker
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for sponsors on sponsoring a worker. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Visas and Immigration

      
      Published
      9 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        13 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 2: sponsor a worker – general information (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 2: sponsor a worker – general information
    
        PDF, 515KB, 55 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
General information for licensed sponsors on how to sponsor a person on the Worker and Temporary Worker immigration routes.



        
      

      
    Published 9 December 2020
    Last updated 13 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 October 2021
              Updated to reflect changes to the Immigration Rules, including the introduction of the new International Sportsperson and Creative Worker routes and rebranding of the other T5 (Temporary Worker) 
routes, to update the process for checking whether a worker needs an ATAS certificate, and to make other minor amendments and clarifications.
            
            
              21 May 2021
              Updated guidance with various changes including to provide additional clarification on the ATAS requirement for researchers.
            
            
              20 April 2021
              Added accessible version.
            
            
              6 April 2021
              Updated guidance reflects changes to the Immigration Rules as set out in the Statement of Changes (HC 1248). Including clarifying the circumstances in which a Skilled Worker’s salary can be reduced without a new application for permission, the introduction of the ATAS requirement for certain roles from 21 May 2021, and minor clarifications.
            
            
              9 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Workers and Temporary Workers - guidance for sponsors part 1: apply for a licence
        Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors part 3: sponsor duties and compliance
        Workers and Temporary Workers: sponsor a Skilled Worker
        Sponsor guidance appendix D: keeping records for sponsorship
        Sponsorship: guidance for employers and educators

  




      

    Collection

  


        Sponsorship: guidance for employers and educators

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Entering and staying in the UK

  


  

  


    
  


    