
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Wormwood Scrubs Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Wormwood Scrubs is a men’s prison in the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham, West London.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      2 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        17 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Wormwood Scrubs

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Wormwood Scrubs

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Wormwood Scrubs

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Wormwood Scrubs

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2 minute survey.


Book and plan your visit to Wormwood Scrubs


Wormwood Scrubs is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 3 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


To visit someone in Wormwood Scrubs you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit at least 2 days in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


At least one visitor must be 18 or older at every visit.

There may be a limit to the number of visits a person can have. You can check this with Wormwood Scrubs.

Contact Wormwood Scrubs if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Wormwood Scrubs
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits

To book a visit, call the visits booking line. There is no online booking available.

Booking/information line: 0300 060 6511
Monday to Friday, 9am to 6pm
Find out about call charges

Visiting times


  Monday: 9am to 11am and 2pm to 4pm
  Tuesday: 9am to 11am
  Wednesday: 9am to 11am and 2pm to 4pm
  Thursday: 9am to 11am and 2pm to 4pm
  Friday: 9am to 11am


You will not be admitted if you are more than half an hour late.

How to book legal and professional visits
Email: hmppsvisitbooking@noms.gsi.gov.uk

You can also book by telephone.

Booking line: 0300 060 6511
Monday to Friday, 9am to 6pm
Find out about call charges

Legal visits can take place at an open table or a closed booth.

Legal visiting times


  Everyday: 9am to 11am and 2pm to 4pm


Getting to Wormwood Scrubs
Find Wormwood Scrubs on a map

Wormwood Scrubs is a 10-minute walk from East Acton underground station. The closest mainline railway station is London Paddington. Several local bus routes pass the prison.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use Transport for London journey planner

  use National Rail Enquiries



If coming by car, you can park outside the prison. You will need to pay and display at certain times during the week. Check times and prices on the London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham website.

There is no visitor parking in the prison.

Entering Wormwood Scrubs
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors will need to be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Wormwood Scrubs has a family-friendly dress code policy which means visitors should dress appropriately. You may be turned away if you are wearing items like vests, low-cut tops, high-cut shorts or dresses, ripped jeans, flip-flops or headwear other than that worn for religious reasons. Additionally, you cannot wear anything with offensive patterns or slogans, uniforms, steel toe-capped boots or motorcycle boots. You will need to remove hats, scarves, sunglasses and metal accessories before you go in. Ask in the visitors centre if you have questions about the dress code.

Each adult visitor is allowed to take in a maximum of £25 to buy food and drink from the canteen in the visiting hall.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Wormwood Scrubs. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker or with security, including pushchairs and car seats. You will need a £1 coin for the locker.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There is a visitors centre run by the Prison Advice and Care Trust (PACT) charity.

The centre is open:
* Monday to Thursday, 8am to 5pm
* Friday 8am to 1pm 
* Saturday 8am to 5pm
* Sunday 1pm to 5pm

Email: wormwoodscrubs@prisonadvice.org.uk
Telephone: 020 8735 0595
Find out about call charges

Family days
There are currently no family days being run.

Keep in touch with someone at Wormwood Scrubs
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Wormwood Scrubs.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Phone calls
Prisoners do not have phones in their rooms so they will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Email
You can send emails to someone in Wormwood Scrubs using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies from the prisoner, depending on the rules at Wormwood Scrubs.

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Wormwood Scrubs.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts

You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
Prisoners are given a list of approved items that can be sent to them as gifts. Contact Wormwood Scrubs for more information on what’s allowed.

All parcels must be sent by a courier service such as DHL or Parcelforce. Wormwood Scrubs will not accept any parcels sent by Royal Mail.

Make sure to include the person’s name and prisoner number on the parcel.

All parcels will be opened and checked by officers.

Friends and families of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.
 
For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Life at Wormwood Scrubs
Wormwood Scrubs is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men can learn new skills to help them on release.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Wormwood Scrubs has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham Safeguarding Adults Board.

Arrival and first night
When a prisoner first arrives at Wormwood Scrubs, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone at the prison who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs.

Induction
Each person who arrives at Wormwood Scrubs gets an induction that lasts about a week. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Around 1200 men live at Wormwood Scrubs in a mixture of single and shared rooms. There are 5 main wings (A to E) plus a number of smaller specialist units.

Facilities include book rooms on all wings and a fully equipped gym.

Wormwood Scrubs Prison has a diverse, multi-faith chaplaincy team providing support to prisoners.

Education and work
Prisoners can choose from a broad range of learning opportunities, including:


  English
  maths
  information and communication technology (ICT)
  English for speakers of other languages (ESOL)
  painting and decorating
  customer service
  barbering
  rail-track laying


There are several contract workshops at Wormwood Scrubs where prisoners can gain work experience and qualifications, including industrial cleaning and laundry.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Wormwood Scrubs. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Wormwood Scrubs in response to independent inspections.

Contact Wormwood Scrubs
Governor: Jonathan French

Telephone: 020 8588 3200
Fax: 020 8588 3201
Find out about call charges

Address


HMP Wormwood Scrubs
PO Box 757
Du Cane Road
London
W12 0AE



See map

Safer custody hotline
Call the switchboard if you’re worried about a man at Wormwood Scrubs and they will put you through to the safer custody team or an orderly officer.




      
        
    Published 2 June 2020
    Last updated 17 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 June 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              21 December 2020
              Visits update
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              15 October 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              19 August 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              6 August 2020
              Added confirmation of secure video calls made available at this prison.
            
            
              26 June 2020
              Updated governor name
            
            
              2 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Erlestoke Prison
        Low Newton Prison and Young Offender Institution
        Stafford Prison
        Werrington Young Offender Institution
        High Down Prison

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    