
        
        
        
     2020 has tested the tenacity and ingenuity of the human spirit. The most devastating pandemic in memory has cost more than 1.5 million lives to date and produced the most profound economic shock since World War II. After almost a year, the COVID-19 pandemic is still raging across the globe, claiming more than a million new cases every other day. The search for vaccines and therapies has been the most urgent and widespread the world has ever seen.
    
    
With the biopharma industry finding itself at the center of global attention from the pandemic’s outset, it has had a remarkable year. The far-reaching changes that the COVID-19 crisis has brought will outlast the pandemic. How companies adapt to those shifts will determine their future success.The recent news on COVID-19 vaccines has signaled a historic moment, but the aftermath of the pandemic will shape almost every aspect of peoples’ lives for years to come. Everyday interactions and social norms will change. So will expectations of governments and institutions. Livelihoods will need to be rebuilt. Lost lives will need to be honored.
	
Amid all the uncertainties, the biopharma industry has faced disruptions of its own. As in many sectors, it has prioritized keeping employees safe, made shifts to remote working, and minimized disruptions in global supply chains. At the same time, it has kept its innovation engines humming to find new treatments and cures and has taken steps to prevent drug shortages, secure supply chains, offer virtual support to physicians and clinical trials, repurpose existing drug therapies, and develop highly efficacious vaccines. And it has done all that within unprecedented time frames, under enormous scrutiny, and with intense external engagement.The cumulative effect of those actions has been extraordinary. Over the course of the past year, the biopharma industry has effectively rewritten many of the implicit rules by which it operates. Now is the time for companies to step back and reflect on how much has changed—and on what new factors will shape their decisions and actions in the years ahead.Three overarching trendsWe believe that all biopharma organizations are likely to be affected by three overarching trends:
    The pandemic has shone a bright light on the biopharma industry, with the press and public avidly discussing the details of clinical trials, the specifics of vaccine supply chains, and the minutiae of regulatory approval. Public expectations of innovation, access to therapies, and responsiveness to medical needs have risen sharply—a change that may well be permanent. How the industry responds to such scrutiny will determine its license to operate in the coming years.
     The global economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis , with China and a few other markets recovering rapidly, while others are likely to continue to struggle for some time. Companies experiencing multiple dips as well as uplifts may be confronted with difficult decisions about resource allocation. As governments and payers count the economic cost of the crisis, healthcare providers of all kinds are likely to come under pressure to reduce costs while broadening access to their products and services.
     Most facets of everyday life—from interacting with colleagues, going shopping, and seeing friends to watching a play or film—have moved online during 2020. Despite strong needs for a return to the satisfaction of connecting in person, socializing, and traveling, many changes will prove structural and permanent. Digital is now truly at the core of peoples’ lives as consumers, service users, patients, and clinicians.
Ten critical themes for CEOs to considerThe COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated and disrupted changes already underway in the biopharma industry—changes that all companies must now embrace in one form or another. Those that do so quickly and comprehensively will be best positioned for future success. Ten critical areas hold the greatest scope for differentiation:
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Biopharma innovation has progressed at an astonishing rate in 2020. The lessons that companies learn and act upon from this extraordinary year may well determine their success for years to come.