
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Find out if you need an ATAS certificate
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out if you need an Academic Technology Approval Scheme certificate to study in the UK.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      17 February 2015
      Last updated
      
        14 May 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          When you need an ATAS certificate

        
        
          Research

        
        
          When you don’t need an ATAS certificate

        
        
          Common Aggregate Hierarchy (CAH3)

        
        
          If you have offers from more than 1 higher education institutions or research institutes

        
        
          Find out how to apply

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Prospective students should read the guidance for their course to find out if they need an ATAS certificate.

When you need an ATAS certificate

Check if you need an ATAS certificate.

Taught or research masters

Contact your proposed Higher Education Institution (HEI) to check whether they define your course as taught or research. Each institution defines the courses it offers differently. Master of Research (MRes) courses can be classified as taught or research. Make sure you know what kind of course you intend to take before you apply for your ATAS certificate.

Research

The UK government defines a researcher as an individual conducting an investigation into a problem or situation, where the intention is to identify facts and/or opinions that will assist in solving the problem or tackling the situation.

A researcher may be working independently or as part of team. You need to apply for an ATAS certificate if research is being conducted at PhD level or above. PhD students should apply through the student route, not researcher route.

If you’re a researcher on a Standard visitor visa attending meetings, conferences, seminars or interviews, or giving speeches, and will not be undertaking research during your time in the UK, you do not need to apply for ATAS clearance.

If you’re a researcher on a standard visitor visa undertaking science and academic activities, including:


  gathering information and facts for a specific project which directly relates to your employment overseas, or to support  independent research
  taking part in formal exchange arrangements with UK counterparts
  carrying out research for your own purposes or as a group


you must apply for an ATAS certificate l, if engaged in an ATAS categorised sensitive subject.

When you don’t need an ATAS certificate

If you are a UK nationals or a national of any of the following countries, you do not need to apply for an ATAS certificate:


  Australia
  Austria
  Belgium
  Bulgaria
  Canada
  Croatia
  Republic of Cyprus
  Czech Republic
  Denmark
  Estonia
  Finland
  France
  Germany
  Greece
  Hungary
  Iceland
  Ireland
  Italy
  Japan
  Latvia
  Liechtenstein
  Lithuania
  Luxembourg
  Malta
  Netherlands
  New Zealand
  Norway
  Poland
  Portugal
  Romania
  Singapore
  Slovakia
  Slovenia
  South Korea
  Spain
  Sweden
  Switzerland
  United States of America


You do not need an ATAS certificate if you’re doing a postgraduate diploma or PGCE. You should continue with your application for permission to stay in the UK  as necessary.

Common Aggregate Hierarchy (CAH3)

All subject areas studied at UK Higher Education Institutions are identified by CAH3 code. Your HEI or research institute will provide you with a CAH3 code and confirm whether you require an ATAS certificate. ATAS uses V1.3.4 of the CAH3.

If you have offers from more than 1 higher education institutions or research institutes

An ATAS certificate shows details of the course or research and higher education institution (HEI) you have applied to for clearance.

If you have more than 1 offer from different HEIs you’ll need to apply for separate ATAS clearance certificates for each HEI and programme of study.


You’ll need a new ATAS certificate if you change courses or research, or if you want to apply for further permission to stay in the UK.


Find out how to apply


  read the guidance on how to apply for an ATAS certificate
  apply for an ATAS certificate






      
        
    Published 17 February 2015
    Last updated 14 May 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 May 2021
              Updated information on ATAS certificates for research
            
            
              6 October 2020
              Updated to reflect borders and immigration system changes
            
            
              10 January 2019
              CAH3 codes have replaced JACS codes
            
            
              6 February 2018
              ATAS information updated for study/research of less than 6 months.
            
            
              22 June 2017
              Find out if you need an Academic Technology Approval Scheme certificate to study in the UK amended.
            
            
              17 February 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Guidance on how to apply for an ATAS certificate
        Academic Technology Approval Scheme (ATAS)
        The Graduate route: information for international students
        Register of licensed sponsors: students
        Graduate visa

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Academic Technology Approval Scheme (ATAS)
        Guidance on how to apply for an ATAS certificate

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Further and higher education courses and qualifications

  


  

  


    
  


    