
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apply for the Energy Entrepreneurs Fund: phase 8A
  

  
  

  
    
  The Energy Entrepreneurs Fund (EEF) is a competitive funding scheme to support the development of technologies, products and processes in energy efficiency, power generation and storage.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      4 February 2021
      Last updated
      
        19 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Energy Entrepreneurs Fund phase 8A guidance document
    
        PDF, 493KB, 59 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Energy Entrepreneurs Fund phase 8A registration form
    
        https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/s/EEF8Registration/
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Energy Entrepreneurs Fund phase 8A application form
    
        https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/s/EnergyEntrepreneursFund8/
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Additional project partner form
    
        ODS, 5.67KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Project cost breakdown form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 108KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Energy Entrepreneurs Fund 8A: questions and answers from applicant information presentation
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Phase 8A of the Energy Entrepreneurs Fund (EEF) is now open for applications.

Made available through the Net Zero Innovation Portfolio, the EEF is a competitive funding scheme to support the development and demonstration of state of the art technologies, products and processes in the areas of energy efficiency, power generation, heat generation and energy storage.

The EEF seeks the best ideas, irrespective of source, across these energy technology areas from the public and private sector. The grant funding scheme particularly aims to assist small and medium-sized enterprises, including start-ups companies. Successful applicants will receive Acceleration Support alongside their project delivery.

Please read the phase 8A guidance document carefully for information on eligibility and how to apply via the online application form.

Key dates

Register your interest by midday on 26 February 2021.

Submit your application by midday on 30 March 2021.




        
      

      
    Published 4 February 2021
    Last updated 19 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 February 2021
              Published questions and answers from the applicant information presentation on 12 February 2021.
            
            
              4 February 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Apply for the Red Diesel Replacement competition Phase 1
        Apply for the Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition
        Floating Offshore Wind (FOW) Demonstration Programme (closed to applications)
        Find funding to help your business become greener
        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  




      

    Collection

  


        Energy Entrepreneurs Fund
        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy
        Low carbon technologies
        Research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    