
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Transport business case: assessment and process procedures
  

  
  

  
    
  How the Department for Transport assesses the business case for major investments.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Transport

      
      Published
      27 April 2011
      Last updated
      
        23 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Transport business case guidance 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Strategic case supplementary guidance: rebalancing toolkit
    
        PDF, 127KB, 14 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webmasterdft@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Enabling behaviour change – information pack
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Enabling behaviour change
    
        PDF, 83.4KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webmasterdft@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Early Assessment and Sifting Tool (EAST)
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 1.42MB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webmasterdft@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Early Assessment and Sifting Tool (EAST) guidance
    
        PDF, 1.04MB, 22 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webmasterdft@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Department for Transport (DfT) is committed to being open and transparent. This document sets out how DfT assesses the business case for major investments and supports ministers as they make decisions on them. This will enable those outside of DfT to understand and engage with what we do. It will also provide scheme promoters and their specialists with comprehensive guidance to make it easier and simpler to understand and engage with our decision-making process.

The business case

Ministers consider the evidence presented to them in a business case when making decisions on major investments. The business case is built up over time and contains all the relevant information regarding a proposed scheme investment set out in 5 dimensions, consistent with the Treasury green book, specifically to show whether a proposal:


  is supported by a robust case for change that demonstrates how the proposal has a strong strategic fit organisation’s priorities, government ambitions and the area(s) in scope – strategic dimension
  demonstrates value for money and the best choice for maximising social welfare through options appraisal – economic dimension
  is commercially viable – commercial dimension
  is financially affordable – financial dimension
  is achievable – management dimension


Strategic dimension

The strategic dimension describes how the transport proposal contributes to achieving strategic priorities and how it aligns with existing portfolios, programmes and projects in DfT, across government and in the geographical area(s) of scope. It should make a compelling, evidence-based case to establish whether a transport intervention is needed either now or in the future. Further useful information is in the:


  carbon tool for local authorities
  Magenta book – guidance notes on policy evaluation and analysis
  hints and tips guide to logic mapping
  Behavioural insights toolkit
  DfT Outcome Delivery Plan: 2021 to 2022


Supplementary strategic case guidance: rebalancing toolkit

DfT’s rebalancing toolkit provides guidance to help authors of strategic dimensions describe the impact of a project or programme on rebalancing growth across the country. It is optional and aimed at projects and programmes where rebalancing is an objective.

The toolkit, for which update tis being made, aims to ensure rebalancing is considered more consistently within decision-making by improving the focus, quality and transparency of the evidence presented.

Economic dimension

The economic dimension assesses whether projects or proposals offer value for money to the public. DfT’s ‘Value for money’ framework provides guidance for undertaking these assessments and communicating to decision-makers.

Financial dimension

The financial dimension provides evidence on the affordability of the proposal, its funding and technical accounting issues. It includes the financial profile of the different options and the impact of the proposed deal on DfT’s budgets and accounts. The following link provides further useful information:


  managing public money


Commercial dimension

The commercial viability of a project or proposal and the procurement strategy that will be used to engage the market is set out and appraised within the commercial dimension. This ensures that there is a clear understanding of the financial implications of any proposed deal, both in terms of the department’s contractual obligations and associated spend in support of the required services. It also looks for evidence on risk allocation and transfer, contract timescales and implementation timescale.

Management dimension

The management dimension ensures that the project is deliverable. It tests the project planning, governance structure, risk management, communications and stakeholder management, benefits realisation and assurance. It ensures that there is clarity in the proposal and a clear and agreed understanding of what needs to be done, why, when and how, with measures in place to identify and manage any risks. The following link provides further useful information:


  transport impact evaluation guidance
  the Major Project Authority’s assurance tool kit
  the Efficiency & Reform Group’s gateway review guidance


Tools that support business cases

Tools are available to produce evidence that supports all 5 dimensions.

Transport Analysis Guidance (TAG)

TAG is the department’s website for guidance on the conduct of transport studies. Evidence that supports all 5 dimensions is produced using TAG and other tools available on these web pages.


  TAG


Early assessment and sifting tool (EAST)

EAST for which an update is currently being made, is a tool to quickly summarise and present evidence on options in a clear and consistent format. It presents relevant, high-level, information so that an early view can be taken on how options perform and compare. Download the tool and guidance via the following links:


  
Early assessment and sifting tool(PDF, 1.41MB) – suitable for Excel 2003 and later versions of Excel
  EAST Guidance (PDF, 252KB)


Equality Duty

The public sector Equality Duty came into force on 5 April 2011.

In complying with the Equality Duty, and with the aim of delivering better and more cost-effective policy outcomes, DfT must have due regard to equalities issues, consciously thinking about equality as a matter of course before making decisions, when developing policies and services, and in all departmental planning. This includes looking at evidence, engaging with staff, service users and others to understand the effect of our policies and practices on the whole community.




        
      

      
    Published 27 April 2011
    Last updated 23 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 August 2021
              Added transport business case guidance 2021.
            
            
              18 December 2017
              Additional supplementary strategic case guidance on the transport investment strategy and a rebalancing toolkit published.
            
            
              20 July 2017
              Update information on how to complete an economic case to include the 'Value for money' framework.
            
            
              12 December 2013
              Value for money assessment added.
            
            
              27 April 2011
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        DfT value for money framework
        TAG unit A1-2 scheme costs
        TAG: capturing local context in transport appraisal
        Transport analysis guidance
        TAG: transport appraisal process

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate and operational information (transport)

  


  

  


    
  


    