
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Summer schools programme
  

  
  

  
    
  Details of the summer schools programme for secondary schools including funding, requirements for running a summer school and best practice evidence.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      30 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        30 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Summer schools guidance
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

Schools should confirm their arrangements and secure their funding for their summer school by completing the confirmation form by 30 June.


The summer schools programme is open to secondary schools. The aim of the programme is to deliver a short summer school, offering a blend of academic education and enrichment activities.

Funding will be made available to:


  state-funded secondary and special schools
  non-maintained special schools
  pupil referral units
  alternative provision for any pupils whose education was funded by the local authority outside of state place funded schools, including:
    
      independent schools
      non-maintained special schools
      other providers
    
  


Eligible secondary schools can access the funding allocations to view the maximum available funding for their school.




        
      

      
    Published 30 March 2021
    Last updated 30 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 June 2021
              Updated the COVID-secure summer school section to make it clear that schools should follow the protective measures for holiday and after-school clubs, and other out-of-school settings guidance.
            
            
              16 June 2021
              Added specific conditions for new free schools to annex B.
            
            
              10 June 2021
              Added a link to the confirmation form. Schools should now confirm their arrangements and secure their funding for their summer school by completing the confirmation form by 30 June.
            
            
              28 May 2021
              We have added clarification that schools may include pupils from any of their year groups (response to queries from schools) and that schools can pay their staff an agreed flat rate rather than payment at salary, expectations for the June confirmation form for schools, how and when schools can bid for additional places and links to more resources. We have added new content to reflect changes to SEND/AP funding and new funding for upper schools and new schools. We have also added the conditions of funding for schools and local authorities.
            
            
              26 April 2021
              Added a link to the sign up form so schools can register their intent to run a summer school, and a link to the funding allocations for eligible secondary schools.
            
            
              30 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19) summer schools programme funding
        Civil Service statistics: 2018

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Running and managing a school
        School curriculum and teaching during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    