
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Local heritage list campaign: announcement of successful areas
  

  
  

  
    
  This campaign encourages communities to nominate those locally important historic buildings which they value most for inclusion in their local authority’s local list.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government

      
      Published
      16 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        2 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Local heritage list campaign: announcement of successful areas
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
In October 2019, the government announced the most ambitious local heritage campaign for decades. The campaign will encourage communities to nominate historic buildings and other heritage assets which they value most for inclusion in their council’s local list, helping to protect them through the planning system.

To support the campaign, the government initially announced the provision of £700,000 of funding to councils in 10 English county areas to develop new or updated local lists.

Charles O’Brien, a leading architectural historian, commissioner at Historic England and editor of the Pevsner Architectural Guides, working closely with Historic England, will work with those selected to support the creation of new and updated local lists.

The funding is intended to support projects which involve a county-wide approach to developing local lists. Successful proposals have also set out how they will engage civic/heritage groups and local historic building societies.

Following overwhelmingly positive interest from authorities, the department has announced a doubling of the original funding allocation to £1.5 million to support local heritage lists. This will enable 22 areas to benefit instead of the 10 originally envisaged.

The successful areas are:


  Lancashire
  Greater Manchester
  Dorset
  County Durham
  Surrey
  Somerset
  South Yorkshire
  Buckinghamshire
  Lincolnshire
  Cambridgeshire
  Cheshire
  Tyne and Wear
  Cumbria
  Merseyside (Knowsley, Sefton and Wirral)
  West Yorkshire
  The Black Country
  Gloucestershire (Gloucester, Tewkesbury)
  Cotswolds (Cotswold, Forest of Dean, West Oxfordshire)
  Hampshire
  Milton Keynes
  Peterborough
  Cornwall




        
      

      
    Published 16 October 2020
    Last updated 2 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 February 2021
              Updated to include the list of successful areas.
            
            
              16 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Conservation of historic buildings and monuments

  


  

  


    
  


    