
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Intelligent Ship Phase 2
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA is looking for novel approaches to revolutionise military decision-making with the aid of Artificial Intelligence

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, and Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      9 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 June 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition document: Intelligent Ship Phase 2
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: Intelligent Ship Phase 2
    
        PDF, 620KB, 9 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: Intelligent Ship Phase 2
    
        PDF, 341KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence & Security Accelerator (DASA) competition seeks proposals for novel and innovative technologies, approaches, and enablers to revolutionise military decision-making, mission planning and automation. The eventual aim, for 2030 and beyond, is to exploit a human-machine network that could work collaboratively on military platforms.

This competition follows a successful Phase 1 call in July 2019, and aims to build on these developments, as well as those made in other Intelligent Ship project activities. Human-machine interfacing will be an important part of this work and will assist stakeholders to envision how this type of intelligent automation can be interfaced with human teams in the future.

£3M is available to fund multiple proposals (one for challenge 1, and multiple for challenge 2) within Phase 2.

This competition closes at midday BST on Tuesday 4 August 2020.



        
      

      
    Published 9 June 2020
    Last updated 29 June 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 June 2020
              Added answers to launch event Q&A session (as an attachment).
            
            
              22 June 2020
              New supplier one-to-one dial-in opportunities added.
            
            
              19 June 2020
              Sections 3.1 and 3.2 - ISAIN documentation now available on request.
            
            
              9 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Armed forces
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    