
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Open general export licence (exports in support of Turkish Aerospace Industries TF-X programme)
  

  
  

  
    
  Licence allowing the export or transfer of goods, software or technology for the Turkish Aerospace Industries TF-X Programme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      26 July 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence (exports in support of Turkish Aerospace Industries TF-X programme)
    
        PDF, 311KB, 15 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Revoked open general export licence (exports in support of Turkish Aerospace Industries TF-X programme)
    
        PDF, 822KB, 14 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This open general export licence (OGEL) allows the export or transfer of goods, software or technology for the Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI) TF-X programme from the United Kingdom to any of the destinations listed in this licence.

Reporting requirements
These OGELs are subject to reporting requirements under the open licence returns transparency initiative.

Revoked licences

The most recent revoked licence is available in the documents section.




        
      

      
    Published 26 July 2017
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              This Open General Export Licence has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              17 December 2020
              This OGEL has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              26 July 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Open general export licence (exports in support of joint strike fighter: F-35 Lightning II)
        Open general export licence (Turkey)
        Open general export licence (export after exhibition: dual-use items)
        Open general licence (Iraq)
        Open general trade control licence (insurance or re-insurance)

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    