
        
        
        
    has brought to light some of the harrowing  and that have often gone ignored or unaddressed.For Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month, we have curated a series of charts based on survey data from , to underscore the current challenges that Asian American workers are experiencing and to chart a path forward to help support them.
            
            
            
            
            
            
    A path forward Achieving equity in the workplace includes understanding and addressing the challenges that Asian American workers experience. To advance a more nuanced approach to workplace diversity, inclusion, and equity, we have compiled the following actions for organizations to consider:Asian American representation across tenures will differ for each organization. Collecting disaggregated data by gender and ethnicity can help identify drop-offs during recruitment, promotion, and retention. Since the Asian American experience can vary significantly across subgroups because of historical immigration trends and cultural differences, further disaggregating the data can reveal important insights.
    
Unconscious bias can have a . Diversity and inclusion trainings for all employees, as well as implicit bias training for evaluators and managers, can serve as a first step to actively correct for potential associations of cultural differences with professional weaknesses.—more so than simply mentorship—involves providing honest coaching, creating career opportunities, and “pounding the table” for earlier-stage employees. Given the lack of representation of Asian American leaders in the workplace already, this responsibility cannot fall solely on their shoulders. Other allies can also lean in and provide sponsorship opportunities to actively help nurture the next generation of Asian American leaders.Asian American workers have been feeling the stresses of combined work and household responsibilities since the start of the COVID-19 crisis. Workplace benefits such as expanded paid sick leave, concierge services, and childcare support can greatly benefit workers who are balancing professional and home commitments.