
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Grant Programme for Consumer IoT Assurance Schemes 2020/21
  

  
  

  
    
  A grant-making programme to support the development of industry-led assurance schemes for consumer IoT security, including details of the successful bids.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      29 May 2020
      Last updated
      
        14 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Application Pack
    
        PDF, 153KB, 12 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ANNEX 1: Sample Grant Offer Letter
    
        PDF, 78.7KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ANNEX 2: Sample Terms and Conditions 
    
        PDF, 193KB, 16 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ANNEX 3: Sample Declaration on De Minimis
    
        PDF, 69KB, 2 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

Applications to this programme have now closed.


Product assurance schemes help consumers make better purchasing decisions in a crowded market. They are a statement of confidence in a product’s ability to keep a person safe (for a given threat model). The better the technical efficacy of the scheme, the more trust we can gain in the product.

They provide feedback to manufacturers to help them improve their product, and can demonstrate effective cyber security measures aligned  with the security requirements of the government’s intended legislation. The requirements of an assurance scheme can go beyond the baseline for compliance with legislation, achieving better security standards. The government wants to support a secure by design approach that manufacturers implement and consumers value.

We recognise the importance of product assurance in achieving good security outcomes, and are working to ensure that product assurance processes play an appropriate role in our legislative approach. Where changes to the wider technological or threat landscapes render it appropriate, the intended legislation will enable Ministers to mandate assurance schemes for particular categories of consumer connected products, especially where the risk to consumers is considered to be high.

DCMS has been working closely with the NCSC to explore how we might gain confidence in products that claim to meet the EN standard. Together, we have supported UK innovators through a £400,000 grant programme to develop pilot schemes. The ultimate objective is to ensure accessibility of the assurance market, and to catalyse uptake of good cybersecurity practice as contained within the ETSI EN 303 645 and the Code of Practice.

There are many ways in which the security of consumer IoT products can be improved, assurance services being one of them. DCMS strongly encourages manufacturers to explore these new services as part of their approach (including those that were not supported through this grant-making initiative).

The three successful bidders have piloted separate assurance schemes to explore different aspects of the consumer IoT landscape. They are:

The Internet of Toys Assurance Scheme: by combining cybersecurity standards with the data protection requirements of the Age Appropriate Design Code, this scheme is tailored for  devices likely to be used by children under 18.

Smart TV Cyber Security Assurance: the SafeShark platform detects specific security vulnerabilities in smart TVs. This will underpin the BSI Consumer IoT Verification Scheme, providing confidence to consumers that best-practice cyber security has been met for TV products displaying the logo.

IASME IoT Security Assured: the scheme is based on self-assessment and review by an assessor, creating an accessible means for start-ups and smaller businesses to show their commitment to protecting consumers from cyber threats.

The three grant recipients will each be offering webinars explaining the nature of their projects, what they have created using the DCMS Grant Funding, and providing an opportunity for interested parties to ask questions of the teams. The webinars will take place on the 19 May 2021. Tickets can be booked in advance of the sessions by clicking on the following links.

Introduction to IoT Security Assured Scheme 9:30-10:30am 19 May: Introduction to IoT Security Assured

Introduction to the Internet of Toys  11-12pm, 19 May: Introduction to the Internet of Toys Certification Scheme

Introduction to Safeshark 12:30-1:30pm, 16 June: Introduction to Safeshark



        
      

      
    Published 29 May 2020
    Last updated 14 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 June 2021
              The 'Introduction to Safeshark' webinar has been moved to Wednesday 16 June, 12:30-1:30pm.
            
            
              21 April 2021
              Added details of the successful bidders to the programme. Added details of free webinars happening on 19 May.
            
            
              10 June 2020
              The eligibility criteria has been amended to provide clarity for bidders.
            
            
              29 May 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        ETSI industry standard based on the Code of Practice
        Smart devices: using them safely in your home
        Proposals for regulating consumer smart product cyber security - call for views
        Regulating consumer smart product cyber security - government response
        Code of Practice for Consumer IoT Security

  




      

    Collection

  


        Secure by Design

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Cyber security

  




      

    World locations

  


        UK and the Commonwealth

  


  

  


    
  


    