
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    5G and coronavirus (COVID-19)
  

  
  
  
      
  There is no evidence of a link between 5G and coronavirus (COVID-19).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      6 May 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          No evidence of a link between 5G and coronavirus

        
        
          How 5G works

        
        
          If you’re not sure, don’t share it

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
No evidence of a link between 5G and coronavirus

There is no evidence of a link between 5G and coronavirus. These theories have been rejected by scientific experts in the World Health Organisation and Full Fact, a UK-based independent fact checking charity.

Viruses cannot travel on radio waves or mobile networks. Coronavirus is also spreading in many countries that do not have 5G mobile networks.

Full Fact makes clear there is no evidence that 5G is harmful to humans and it is not accelerating the spread of coronavirus.

Ofcom has produced guidance to address the myths around 5G and coronavirus, while the UK’s mobile network operators (EE, O2, Three and Vodafone) have issued a joint statement highlighting that there is no scientific evidence of any link between 5G and coronavirus.

How 5G works

5G is the next generation of wireless network technology. 5G mobile data is transmitted over radio waves. These radio waves are non-ionising, meaning they do not carry enough energy to directly damage a person’s DNA inside cells.

Read Public Health England’s guidance on radio waves and health.

If you’re not sure, don’t share it

Before you like, comment or share something about coronavirus online, use the SHARE Checklist to help spot false or misleading content.




      
        
    Published 6 May 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Communications and telecomms
        Public health
        Health and wellbeing during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    