

In this report, the authors examine the propensity within China's innovation system to realize its potential as an innovating nation: What is the balance of systemic forces that incline toward seeing that the innovation assets China possesses lead to innovation outcomes? They lay out a conceptual framework for capturing the major activities, interactions, and flows that give rise to technological innovations.




Read Online

China's Propensity for Innovation in the 21st Century
Identifying Indicators of Future Outcomes
by Steven W. Popper, Marjory S. Blumenthal, Eugeniu Han, Sale Lilly, Lyle J. Morris, Caroline S. Wagner, Christopher A. Eusebi, Brian G. Carlson, Alice Shih
Related Topics: Bibliometrics, China, Economics, Emerging Technologies, Network Analysis, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






DownloadDownload eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


3.3 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.




Purchase
Purchase Print Copy

 FormatList Price
Price


Add to Cart
Paperback168 pages
$48.00
$38.40 20% Web Discount










Research Questions

How far will China be able to go toward achieving the pathbreaking innovation it seeks broadly across many sectors?
What information would be needed to better understand China's propensity for innovation and thus assess its trajectory in the coming decades?
How well might standard criteria for evaluation used in other technology-leading nations apply to a system affirmatively designed to follow a development path "with Chinese characteristics"?




The authors examine the propensity within China's innovation system to realize its potential as an innovating nation: What is the balance of systemic forces that incline toward seeing that the innovation assets China possesses lead to innovation outcomes? They lay out a conceptual framework for capturing the major activities, interactions, and flows that give rise to technological innovations. They use this framework to place within one matrix salient elements that appear in the global literature on innovation; the literature on innovation in China and on its political, economic, and social systems; the results from three case studies prepared for this report (pharmaceuticals, artificial intelligence, and distributed ledger technology); and three different inquiries into the nature and measurement of network organization. They then provide a determination of which cells in the matrix that result from placing these elements into the innovation framework might be most useful as windows into those aspects of China's innovation system dynamics that might be expected to affect innovation propensity and observed innovation outcomes.
Measures are developed for these elements with an emphasis more on what observers would like to know as opposed to what information might be most readily available presently. Thirteen of these indicators are then selected to form a preliminary "dashboard" of candidate indicators for China's propensity toward future innovation. These are offered not as final findings but rather as a first set of candidates to be assessed and refined in later empirical analyses. The authors also offer sample proxies for these draft indicators.
Key Findings

The conceptual framework was developed as an intellectual accounting system for factors affecting both innovation potential and innovation propensity. It is intended to be populated with the main elements of China's system for generating innovation, both "apples and oranges."
The candidate short list of indicators for China's innovation propensity was derived by sifting through existing relevant literatures, both academic literature as well as the "gray" literature found in journalism in print and online; conducting case studies of sectors selected for the contrast they could provide; and investigating possible measurement techniques.
Sectoral case studies reveal differences between the high priority artificial intelligence sector and lesser priority pharmaceuticals. Distributed ledger technology ("blockchain") was a field of early advantage for China in which policy and political considerations have worked to limit and stifle innovation.
Bibliometric analysis and review of patent data suggest China is advancing swiftly in academic publication, while patenting shows more priority on focused areas as opposed to the wide exploration of economic niches found in the United States.
A major policy thrust of China's party leadership has been to inculcate adherence to a model of development "with Chinese characteristics." Therefore, it is insufficient to presume similarity of institutional structure with prior innovation case studies. The nature of the system needs to be regarded explicitly and a presumed equivalency resisted.



Recommendations

Track developments in individual technology fields and sectors. However, a fuller picture of China's future accomplishments may be gained by also considering larger systemic and institutional issues at the sectoral, regional, and national levels.
Build a prospectus for examining China's system for generating innovation by determining what observable measures might be the early indicators or precursors that would allow for more accurately gauging the trajectory of China's rise to innovation prominence and how far it may go.
Consider important activities, factors, and venues for innovation in China; place them in an integrated framework; propose measures for the most important factors affecting the propensity toward innovation in China; and, from among these measures, select an initial "dashboard" of candidate indicators going forward and provide insights into the nature and dynamics of the changing system.



Table of Contents

Chapter One
Capturing Lightning in a Bottle: Innovation and State Power

Chapter Two
The Nature of Innovation and the Location of Innovative Activity

Chapter Three
The Road Toward the Chinese Century

Chapter Four
Gleaning from Case Studies of Sectoral Innovation

Chapter Five
Quantitative and Digital Evidence of Networks in China

Chapter Six
Measures and Indicators of China's Innovation Propensity

Chapter Seven
Innovation Propensity: Looking Toward the Future

Appendix A
Case Study: China and Artificial Intelligence

Appendix B
Case Study: China and Pharmaceutical Products

Appendix C
Bibliometric Measurement of Scientific Knowledge Networks




Research conducted by

RAND National Security Research Division



Funding for this venture was made possible by the independent research and development provisions of RAND Corporation's contracts for the operation of its U.S. Department of Defense federally funded research and development centers. This research was conducted by the Acquisition and Technology Policy Center within the RAND National Security Research Division.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Available

Print
Format: Paperback
Paperback Pages: 168
List Price: $48.00
Paperback Price:  $38.40
Paperback ISBN/EAN: 9781977405968
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA208-1
Document Number: RR-A208-1
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

BibliometricsChinaEconomicsEmerging TechnologiesNetwork AnalysisScience, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Popper, Steven W., Marjory S. Blumenthal, Eugeniu Han, Sale Lilly, Lyle J. Morris, Caroline S. Wagner, Christopher A. Eusebi, Brian G. Carlson, and Alice Shih, China's Propensity for Innovation in the 21st Century: Identifying Indicators of Future Outcomes. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA208-1.html. Also available in print form.
Popper, Steven W., Marjory S. Blumenthal, Eugeniu Han, Sale Lilly, Lyle J. Morris, Caroline S. Wagner, Christopher A. Eusebi, Brian G. Carlson, and Alice Shih, China's Propensity for Innovation in the 21st Century: Identifying Indicators of Future Outcomes, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A208-1, 2020. As of December 16, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA208-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



