
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT): an overview of UK action
  

  
  
  
      
  The UK works within the NPT to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, promote cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and advance nuclear disarmament.  

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      2 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Pillar I: Disarmament

        
        
          Pillar II: Non-Proliferation

        
        
          Pillar III: Peaceful uses

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Pillar I: Disarmament

The UK is committed to the long-term goal of a world without nuclear weapons. Within the NPT, the UK is working to preserve and strengthen effective arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation measures.

The UK has led by example on nuclear disarmament. Since the end of the Cold War, we have dismantled our tactical and air-delivered nuclear weapons, becoming the only Nuclear Weapon State (NWS) with a single weapon system. We have also reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security strategy, and significantly reduced our total stockpile of nuclear warheads.

The 5 NWS have a special responsibility for the continued strength and implementation of the NPT. The UK established the P5 Process in 2009 among the NWS to build trust and confidence. This process provides a forum to improve coordination and dialogue on nuclear issues.

We play a leading role in researching how nuclear disarmament can be monitored and verified, which will be essential to achieving a nuclear weapon free world in the future. We invest significantly in our national research programme at the Atomic Weapons Establishment and actively participate in international initiatives. These include the Quad Nuclear Verification Partnership and the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification.

We continue to press for steps towards multilateral disarmament with other States. These include calling for successful negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty within the Conference on Disarmament and the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). We were one of the first NWS to ratify the CTBT.

Pillar II: Non-Proliferation

The UK champions the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) international safeguards system including by encouraging all States to ratify and fully implement safeguards agreements.

The UK works with other States to enhance international nuclear security. In particular, we work to ensure that international agreements and guidelines are as effective as possible, and are ratified and implemented by as many countries as possible.

The UK strongly supports efforts to strengthen the safeguards system, especially the universalisation of the Additional Protocol. This provides the greatest assurance that States’ nuclear activities are exclusively peaceful due to its additional tools for verification.

To further support the non-proliferation, the UK remains one of the largest contributors of extra budgetary funding to the IAEA through its Safeguards Support Programme and through the Nuclear Security Fund.

Pillar III: Peaceful uses

The UK is committed to ensuring that all countries are able to benefit from peaceful nuclear technologies. Expanding access to these technologies will contribute to achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs) in areas including human health, access to food and water, clean energy and the environment.

The UK works to improve access to the benefits of peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. We are contributing to international efforts to identify and overcome challenges in accessing these technologies. We also provide support to the IAEA to further develop nuclear technologies and to help countries to use them safely and securely.

The peaceful uses of nuclear technology have benefitted the UK. Nuclear power will continue to play a crucial role in the UK’s energy mix as we seek to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. The UK is pursuing both large scale new nuclear projects and advanced nuclear technologies, with £525 million to be invested into the nuclear sector.

The UK is committed to providing reassurance to the global public that the UK and other states use nuclear technologies responsibly and commit to ensuring public safety. We are striving to continuously improve our emergency preparedness and response requirements and incorporate international best practice.


Find out more about:


  UK actions in the UK National Report for the 10th review conference

  the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)








      
        
    Published 2 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
        The Non-Proliferation Treaty remains essential to maintain peace and security
        Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: UK report for the 10th review conference. James Cleverly's statement

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Foreign affairs
        Nuclear disarmament

  


  

  


    
  


    