
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Swaleside Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Swaleside is a men’s high security prison on the Isle of Sheppey in Kent. It is part of the Sheppey Cluster, along with Elmley and Standford Hill. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      19 May 2020
      Last updated
      
        3 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Swaleside

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Swaleside

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Swaleside

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Swaleside

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.


Book and plan your visit to Swaleside


Swaleside is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 2 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


To visit someone in Swaleside you must:


  be on that prisoners visitor list
  book your visit in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


Visits must be booked by 1pm on the day before the visit.

At least one visitor must be 18 or older at every visit.

There may be a limit to the number of visits a prisoner can have. You can check this with Swaleside.

Contact Swaleside if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Swaleside
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits
Swaleside is currently operating a limited visits schedule for family and friends. You can book your visit by telephone or via email at the address below.

Email: SocialVisits.Swaleside@justice.gov.uk

Booking line: 0300 060 6604
Monday to Friday, 8:30am to 4pm
Find out about call charges

Visiting times:


  Tuesday to Thursday: 2:30pm to 4pm


You will be given a full hour once inside the visits hall.

How to book legal and professional visits

Visiting times:


  Tuesday to Thursday: 2pm to 4pm


Hour booking slots are available.

Bookings can be made by emailing: LegalVisits.Swaleside@justice.gov.uk

Getting to Swaleside
Find Swaleside on a map

The closest railway station is Sheerness-on-Sea, where you can catch a bus or taxi to the prison.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



There is a visitors car park, including space for Blue Badge holders.

Entering Swaleside

All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors will pass through a metal detector and be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Swaleside has a family-friendly dress code policy which means visitors should dress appropriately. You may be turned away if you are wearing items like vests, low-cut tops, high-cut shorts or dresses, see-through or ripped clothing or headwear other than that worn for religious reasons. Additionally, you cannot wear anything with offensive patterns or slogans, cargo or combat trousers, slippers, flip flops, padded coats or anything fitted with large buckles, chains or a lot of zips. You will need to remove hats, scarves, sunglasses, gloves, watches and excessive jewellery before you go in.

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Swaleside. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker, which requires a £1 refundable deposit. This includes pushchairs and car seats.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There is a Spurgeonsteam in the hall.

Telephone: 01795 804 081
Find out about call charges

Keep in touch with someone at Swaleside
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Swaleside.

Phone calls
Prisoners do not have phones in their rooms so they will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Email
You can send emails to someone in Swaleside using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies from the prisoner, depending on the rules at Swaleside.

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the Prisoners name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Swaleside.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts
You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
Prisoners can apply for permission to receive an annual Birthday clothing parcel which can be posted in from friends and family. .

Family and friends of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.
 
For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

There are limits to the number of items a prisoner can receive. Please discuss these when you speak with him.

All parcels will be opened and checked by officers.

You can also send prisoners money as well which they can use to buy items through a catalogue system.

Life at Swaleside
Swaleside is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men convicted of serious offences can make positive use of long sentences.

Security and safeguarding
Every prisoner at Swaleside has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by the Kent and Medway Safeguarding Adults Board.

Arrival and first night
When a prisoner first arrives at Swaleside, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs.

Induction
Each prisoner that arrives at Swaleside gets an induction that lasts about a week. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Around 1100 men live at Swaleside across 8 wings. All men get their own rooms.

Education and work
Prisoners have access to a broad programme of learning opportunities provided by Amersham and Wickham College. These range from basic skills, such as English and maths, to distance learning with the Open University. Swaleside is part of the Prisons ICT Academy (PICTA) which helps prepare prisoners for work in information and communications technology (ICT) roles.

Work is available throughout the prison in areas such as industrial cleaning and engineering. Prisoners are also employed by several industrial workshops through contracts with outside businesses.

Swaleside also runs a number of accredited offending behaviour programmes and non-accredited courses for personal and social development.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Support at Swaleside
The Spurgeons family services team provides a range of information, guidance and support to families and friends of prisoners. Ask in the visitors centre for more information.

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Swaleside. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Swaleside in response to independent inspections.

Contact Swaleside
Governor: Mark Icke

Telephone: 01795 804 100
Fax: 01795 804 200
Find out about call charges

Follow Swaleside on Twitter

Address


HMP Swaleside
Brabazon Road
Eastchurch
Isle of Sheppey
Kent
ME12 4AX



See map

Safer custody hotline
If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a man in Swaleside, call the safer custody hotline. If your call is sent to answerphone, leave as much information as possible and a contact number for someone to call you back. Messages are checked regularly.

Telephone: 01795 804 295
Find out about call charges

In an emergency, call the main telephone number and ask to speak to the orderly officer.


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.






      
        
    Published 19 May 2020
    Last updated 3 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 September 2021
              Updated physical contact guidance
            
            
              19 July 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              21 December 2020
              visits update
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              16 November 2020
              Updated professional visits details
            
            
              6 November 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new national restrictions in England.
            
            
              10 August 2020
              Updated visiting times and visiting procedure changes in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              19 May 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Portland Prison and Young Offender Institution
        Grendon Prison
        Aylesbury Young Offender Institution
        Sudbury Prison
        Prescoed Prison

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    