
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Machine learning with limited data
  

  
  

  
    
  A guide to machine learning techniques for limited data problems, including approaches for small amounts of data and for large amounts of unlabelled data. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      7 December 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Machine Learning with Limited Data - original version 
    
        PDF, 1.86MB, 38 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email centralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Machine Learning with Limited Data - accessible version 
    
        PDF, 1.32MB, 57 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI) where computers algorithms examine datasets, find common patterns, and learn and improve without being explicitly programmed. It offers Defence significant benefits, such as increasing the amount of data that can be analysed and reducing the load on human analysts. Sometimes state-of-the-art machine learning models cannot be applied due to a lack of data or the expense and time required to label enough examples, so other approaches must be taken.

This handbook informs and guides machine learning practitioners on the machine learning approaches currently possible for solving limited data problems, including:


  how much data is required
  ways to deal with small amounts of data, including zero-shot learning and meta-learning
  ways to deal with large amounts of mostly unlabelled data
  model refinement
  technology readiness levels


This guide captures some of the knowledge gained from Dstl research into low-shot learning carried out by the Future of AI for Defence project, part of the Dstl Autonomy programme.




        
      

      
    Published 7 December 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Autonomy Programme
        AI, Data Science and Machine Learning: a Dstl biscuit book
        Assurance of AI and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
        Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
        Building Blocks for AI and Autonomy: a Dstl biscuit book

  




      

    Collection

  


        Dstl biscuit books

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Scientific research and development
        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    