
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    How Digital Marketplace suppliers have been evaluated
  

  
  
  
      
  How suppliers apply to get on the Digital Marketplace.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Digital Service and Crown Commercial Service

      
      Published
      18 April 2016
      Last updated
      
        9 October 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          The application process

        
        
          The supplier declaration

        
        
          Service details

        
        
          
CCS checks

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Digital Marketplace team and the Crown Commercial Service (CCS) don’t evaluate suppliers or their individual services.

When you buy a service through the Digital Marketplace, you must check that both the supplier and the service can meet your needs. This means that you must write clear requirements and evaluate suppliers’ services against them.

The application process

There are 2 parts to the supplier application process on the Digital Marketplace. Suppliers have to:


  Confirm information about their company history and the way they work through a series of questions. This is called the ‘supplier declaration’.
  Add information about the services that they want to offer.


The supplier declaration

Suppliers are legally required to meet a set of minimum standards. Only those suppliers who state that they meet these minimum standards in the supplier declaration are considered for a place on a framework (agreement between government and suppliers).

All G-Cloud and Digital Outcomes and Specialists suppliers on the Digital Marketplace have to confirm that they:


  agree to the latest G-Cloud framework agreement or Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework agreement

  will take full responsibility for the work they do
  haven’t broken any laws that could lead to a mandatory exclusion from the application process


Digital Outcomes and Specialists suppliers also have to confirm that they’ll work according to:


  Civil Service values
  the government’s digital-by-default service standard

  the government technology code of practice

  
accessibility standards set out by the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) Accessibility Regulations 2018
  corporate social responsibility standards, for example providing a modern slavery and human trafficking statement



Service details

As well as completing the supplier declaration, all suppliers have to provide information on their services. The details suppliers are asked to give depends on the category they apply to.

Digital Outcomes and Specialists service details

Digital Outcomes and Specialists services have to fit into 1 of 4 categories, or lots:


  digital outcomes, for example a team to provide a booking system beta or an accessibility audit
  digital specialists, for example an individual developer or user researcher to work on a specific project
  user research studios
  user research participants


Digital Outcomes and Specialists suppliers must include information like:


  where they can work
  how much their services cost
  services they can provide


G-Cloud service details

G-Cloud services have to fit into 1 of 3 different lots:


  cloud hosting, for example content delivery networks or load balancing services
  cloud software, for example accounting tools or customer service management software
  cloud support, for example migration services or ongoing support


G-Cloud suppliers must include information like:


  how secure their services are
  how much their services cost
  where they store your data
  whether their services are based on open standards


Read the G-Cloud suppliers’ guide or the Digital Outcomes and Specialists suppliers’ guide to learn more.


CCS checks
After suppliers have been accepted on to a framework, CCS:


  monitors supplier credit scores, for example Experian credit scores and Dun & Bradstreet financial stress scores
  investigates specific queries raised about suppliers
  performs assurance verification on services to ensure they match the information provided in supplier applications


It’s your responsibility to check whether the supplier can offer a service that meets your needs.





      
        
    Published 18 April 2016
    Last updated 9 October 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 October 2020
              Updated information suppliers have to provide in a Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework application
            
            
              28 September 2020
              The G-Cloud 12 framework is live. You must use this contract to buy services from Monday 28 September 2020.
            
            
              1 October 2019
              Supplier on the Digital Outcomes and Specialists 4 framework will have to agree to work to 2018 accessibility regulations and meet corporate social responsibility standards.
            
            
              2 July 2019
              Changed 'G-Cloud 10' to 'G-Cloud 11', which is the current version of the G-Cloud framework.
            
            
              1 October 2018
              Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3 is live. You must use this contract to buy services from Monday 1 October 2018.
            
            
              2 July 2018
              You must refer to the G-Cloud 10 terms and conditions when you sell services from Monday 2 July.
            
            
              22 May 2017
              Updated to reflect new G-Cloud 9 'lot' structure.
            
            
              18 April 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Buying services on the Digital Marketplace
        Buying and selling on the Digital Marketplace
        How to hire user research studios on the Digital Marketplace
        Applying to the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework
        Talking to suppliers before you buy Digital Marketplace services

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government spending

  


  

  


    
  


    