A manufacturer is striving to create a continuous improvement culture to enable their goals of expanding into new markets. After , they found that knowledge sharing is infrequent—a behavior that is crucial to drive improvements. Teams worked in siloes, solutions were recreated locally and people rarely asked for help. The leaders investigated companies that were world-class in continuous improvement and found that each of them had a robust knowledge management platform that made it easy to codify and share information. Having found the solution, the team invested millions of dollars into a knowledge management system only to find that months later, it was hardly used.This manufacturer is not alone. During transformations, there is a tendency to jump directly from defining the aspiration to crafting the intervention. The step that is most often  is to understand why employees aren’t engaging in the right behaviors today. Your employees are smart, hard-working and well-intentioned people, and it is unlikely that they come to work each day thinking, “I am going to avoid sharing knowledge today.” Therefore, it raises the question, if sharing knowledge is an easy and seemingly obvious behavior, why aren’t these great and well-intentioned people practicing it?When you take the time to ask employees “the why,” you’ll find that they generally have a  that makes adopting these behaviors incongruent with their worldview. Without employees questioning and shifting these beliefs, interventions won’t drive action because they don’t address the underlying cause of the problem: . Getting “below the iceberg” to understand these beliefs that are getting in the way requires holding focus groups and one-on-one interviews, using an assortment of questioning tactics from provocations to hypotheticals to pushing for detailed examples. Assessments can also be used to do this at scale.Sample questions to uncover limiting mindsetsYou will know you have uncovered a mindset when you reach a belief that is rational, relatable and shapes someone’s worldview. With respect to our knowledge sharing example, common mindsets we’ve seen include:Once mindsets are uncovered, driving actions requires creating interventions specifically geared towards addressing and . For example:Only once you have asked the questions to determine why individuals aren’t behaving a certain way today are you able to develop solutions that address and fundamentally shift the limiting mindsets standing in people’s way. When it comes to changing behaviors in the workplace, the more questions you ask the more action you see.