
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Supporting Employers – Cheshire and Warrington (OC03S19P1699)
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project to deliver a range of careers development activity and increase appropriate skills provision by supporting SME’s across the Cheshire and Warrington LEP area.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      28 November 2019
      Last updated
      
        19 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      North West
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      18 March 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

            
                
                  Promoting Career Opportunities in Key Sectors
                
                
                  Articulating the Skills Needs of SMEs and Helping to Ensure that Local Skills Delivery Meets those Needs
                
                
                  Strengthening Digital Skills
                
            
        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for information purposes only.


Details

The following sectors are highlighted as key to the Cheshire and Warrington economy:


  energy and clean growth
  life sciences
  manufacturing, including chemicals, pharmaceuticals, automotive, and food and drink
  logistics


The activities being sought under this call include:

Promoting Career Opportunities in Key Sectors

This project will put SME employers in priority sectors at the heart of inspiring and informing young people and individuals seeking work or wanting to progress about future opportunities available.

Articulating the Skills Needs of SMEs and Helping to Ensure that Local Skills Delivery Meets those Needs

This project will support expert facilitators for each priority sector who will work closely with SMEs and micro businesses to understand and articulate their current and future skills needs.

Strengthening Digital Skills

This project will support a digital co-ordinator to work across Cheshire and Warrington SMEs to engage more businesses about the importance of digital and STEM-related skills.

Applications are encouraged from consortia or other similar types of partnership arrangements. In each such case the application must be completed and submitted in the ECLAIMS IT system by the lead organisation on behalf of the partnership/consortia. The lead applicant must have the financial capacity to meet the required Due Diligence criteria and, if ESF funding is awarded, this organisation will then become the lead Grant Recipient, accountable for delivery of the overall ESF Project.

For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Cheshire and Warrington LEP area.

Value

Approximately £500,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 18 March 2020

Completion date

Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.

The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details

If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 28 November 2019
    Last updated 19 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 March 2020
              Supporting Employers – Cheshire and Warrington (OC03S19P1699) project call is now closed.
            
            
              12 February 2020
              Supporting Employers – Cheshire and Warrington (OC03S19P1699) project call, closing date is now the 18 March 2020.
            
            
              28 November 2019
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    