DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy's  (BETO) and  (AMO) released the . This report summarizes the results of a BETO and AMO co-sponsored public workshop held in Denver, CO, on December 11-12, 2019. This workshop was held as part of the , a comprehensive DOE program to accelerate innovations in energy-efficient plastics recycling technologies. Download the report .DOE announced approximately $64 million in Fiscal Year 2020 funding for 18 projects that will support the  vision for affordable hydrogen production, storage, distribution, and use. The projects will be funded through the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy's (EERE)  (HFTO). AMO will invest $5 million in manufacturing reliable and affordable electrolyzers and $7.5 million to develop low-cost, high-strength carbon fiber for hydrogen storage tanks. Learn more about specific selections .DOE, in partnership with the , announced a Request for Proposals (RFP) for innovations in intensified brine-management solutions for high-salinity streams. The RFP supports the Water Security Grand Challenge (WSGC), a White House-initiated, DOE-led framework to advance transformational technology and innovation to meet the global need for safe, secure, and affordable water using a coordinated suite of prizes, competitions, R&D, and other programs. View the RFP . Concept papers are due September 21, 2020.DOE's  (CESMII) announced selections totaling up to $1 million for five projects to announced selections totaling up to $1 million for five projects to identify ways to use smart-manufacturing technologies to improve productivity, precision, performance and energy efficiency. This request for proposals (RFP) falls under a new category of CESMII projects called “smart-manufacturing innovation projects.” Selected project teams will create “smart-manufacturing profiles”—a library of reusable information, including models of manufacturing processes and related equipment—that will help achieve CESMII's energy objectives. Learn more about the selectees .DOE's  (REMADE) Manufacturing Institute  approximately $35 million to support research and development (R&D) that will enable U.S. manufacturers to increase the recovery, recycling, reuse, and remanufacturing of plastics, metals, electronic waste, and fibers. The funding opportunity announcement (FOA) is part of the Department's , a comprehensive program to accelerate innovations in plastics recycling technologies. REMADE also announced the selections of more than $6 million for nine projects. The selected projects will improve the U.S. materials recycling or remanufacturing industry. View the . Letters of Intent and Project Abstracts are due September 14, 2020.  the list of projects selected.On August 4, DOE awarded the  to eight individuals who implemented creative, specific, and innovative ideas and practices that led to measurable energy savings at their manufacturing facilities. One additional project received an honorable mention.ITEAM prize winners will receive a cash prize of $5,000 and will be recognized at the virtual . To facilitate sharing of successful energy saving strategies, their winning ideas and practices are highlighted on the .Learn more about the winners on the .Last month, DOE announced a request for information (RFI) for advances in components, systems, and products that can withstand harsh environments and extended service lifetimes. Responses to this RFI will inform research and development portfolio planning for materials that can withstand harsh environments and their manufacturing.Read the announcement, made jointly with the  within the , on the . Responses are due no later than 5:00 p.m. ET on September 21, 2020. will host an event on September 15, 2020 to showcase the technologies and emerging companies of innovators in DOE's Lab Embedded Entrepreneurship Programs. This year's Demo Day will feature 18 innovators from Chain Reaction Innovations at Argonne National Laboratory, as well as Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Innovation Crossroads program and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory's Cyclotron Road program. RSVP for the Demo Day .Chain Reaction Innovations will also host informational webinars about how to apply for the next cohort on September 22, October 8, and October 22. Click here to .The Better Plants program has launched the second round of its Online Learning Series, held weekly on Thursdays. Topics focus on helping manufacturers and industrial facilities improve their energy efficiency and competitiveness. To view upcoming subjects and to register, .