







From "Informed" to "Engaged" Consent
Risks and Obligations in Consent for Participation in a Health Data RepositoryPublished in: Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, Volume 48, Issue 1, pages 172–182 (Spring 2020). doi: 10.1177/1073110520917007 Posted on RAND.org on January 07, 2021
by Elizabeth Bromley, Alexandra Mendoza-Graf, Sandra H. Berry, Camille Nebeker, Dmitry Khodyakov
Related Topics: Bioethics, Data Science, Health Information Technology

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at Journal of LawThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








The development and use of large and dynamic health data repositories designed to support research pose challenges to traditional informed consent models. We used semi-structured interviewing (n=44) to elicit diverse research stakeholders' views of a model of consent appropriate to participation in initiatives that entail collection, long-term storage, and undetermined future research use of multiple types of health data. We demonstrate that, when considering health data repositories, research stakeholders replace a concept of consent as informed with one in which consent is engaged. In engaged consent, a participant's ongoing relationship with a repository serves as a substitute or adjunct to information exchange at enrollment. We detail research stakeholders' views of the risks of engaged consent and suggest questions for further study about engagement and consent procedures in initiatives that aim to store data for future unspecified research purposes.

Access further information on this document at Journal of LawThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

RAND Health Care



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Elizabeth Bromley, Alexandra Mendoza-Graf, Sandra Berry, Camille Nebeker and Dmitry KhodyakovPublisher: Cambridge University Press
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 11
Document Number: EP-68426
Year: 2020
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

BioethicsData ScienceHealth Information Technology

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




