
      



  
    


      
    Promotional material
  

  
  
    Customs Declaration Service communication pack
  

  
  

  
    
  Find communication products and information to help traders and intermediaries use the Customs Declaration Service. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      16 September 2019
      Last updated
      
        19 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Customs Declaration Service toolkit
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Key differences between CHIEF and the Customs Declaration Service
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    UK imports guide
    
        PDF, 620KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    UK exports guide
    
        PDF, 741KB, 3 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    CDS Movement Reference Number Guide
    
        PDF, 580KB, 2 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    CDS Finance Factsheet
    
        PDF, 383KB, 5 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
HMRC is gradually introducing the Customs Declaration Service, the long-term replacement for the current Customs Handling of Import and Export Freight (CHIEF) system.

These resources have been developed to help businesses and their agents prepare for making declarations on the Customs Declaration Service, and will help you understand:


  what’s changing
  where to get guidance
  how you can prepare


Find out about new requirements for completing an import declaration on the Customs Declaration Service.

Further training and guidance can also be found on the Trader Support Service Academy.

Customs Declaration Service toolkit

The Customs Declaration Service toolkit provides a comprehensive overview of the Customs Declaration Service, explaining the benefits traders will experience using the new system, as well as key information about what businesses need to do to prepare.

Key differences between CHIEF and the Customs Declaration Service

A quick overview of the main differences between how you make declarations on the Customs Declaration Service compared to how it is currently done on Customs Handling of Imports and Exports Freight (CHIEF).

Customs Declaration Service finance guide

This overview guide denotes the upcoming Customs Declaration Service finance releases, scheduled for the end of October 2021. The guide is a revised iteration of the previously circulated version issued earlier this year.

UK imports guide

The UK imports guide underpins the declaration process, detailing the classification information for all goods, including any special conditions that may apply. The guide also explains the key changes brought about by the Union Customs Code (UCC) and signposts to affiliated GOV.UK pages, where further information can be found.

UK exports guide

Similar to the UK imports guide, the UK exports guide underpins the exports declaration process, detailing the classification information for all goods, including any special conditions that may apply. The guide also explains the key changes brought about by the (UCC) and signposts to affiliated GOV.UK pages, where further information can be found.

Movement Reference Number guide

This guide sets how Movement Reference Numbers will be assigned on the Customs Declaration Service and how they differ to those used on CHIEF. The guide also outlines how Movement Reference Numbers are used on the Goods Vehicle Movement service and details what Movement Reference Numbers look like and their importance in the audit process for declarations.




        
      

      
    Published 16 September 2019
    Last updated 19 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 October 2021
              Published an updated version of the 'Customs Declaration Service stakeholder toolkit', and added 'Key differences between CHIEF and the Customs Declaration Service' to the page.
            
            
              25 March 2021
              Link to the new requirements when completing an import declaration on the Customs Declaration Service added.
            
            
              4 November 2020
              The UK imports guide and UK exports guide have been added to the Customs Declaration Service communication pack.
            
            
              15 April 2020
              Removed migration timetable on page 7 of Customs Declaration Service toolkit – a new timetable will be published shortly.
            
            
              16 September 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Import goods into the UK: step by step
        Export goods from the UK: step by step
        Check if you need to declare goods you bring into or take out of the UK

  




      

    Collection

  


        Customs Declaration Service

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Import, export and customs for businesses

  


  

  


    
  


    