— The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) today released a Request for Information (RFI) on technologies ready to be demonstrated that reduce carbon emissions and remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The RFI seeks feedback from industry, investors, developers, academia, research laboratories, government agencies, NGOs, and potentially affected communities (including environmental justice, Tribal, energy transition, and other communities). The RFI follows the enactment of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which includes  a more equitable clean energy future for the American people by, among other things, building the technologies of tomorrow.
“There is no time to waste in delivering the benefits of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to the American people, which includes over $10 billion to deploy effective carbon reduction and removal technologies,” said. “DOE’s request for information will help ensure this historic climate investment supports an equitable energy transition, eliminates greenhouse gas emissions, generates good-paying jobs, and enables a net-zero economy by 2050.”Technologies to decarbonize most of our economy are both available and affordable thanks in part to decades of technology development led by DOE, but further innovation, demonstration, and large-scale deployment of carbon management solutions are needed to reach the Biden Administration’s goals of 100% carbon-free electricity by 2035 and a net-zero-carbon economy by 2050. The RFI seeks information on direct air capture, point source carbon capture, geologic storage, carbon dioxide infrastructure, and more — all emerging carbon management technology areas where demonstration and deployment has been limited.  In all cases, the RFI seeks information about the entire life cycle of these technologies, including fossil fuel supply chain considerations, future system risks, and social/institutional context. The information provided through this request will help to inform the design of successful projects as well as the effective, just, and sustainable deployment of technologies that will enable a safe climate future, with particular attention to including historically marginalized communities in the decision-making process. This is solely a request for information and is not a Funding Opportunity Announcement. DOE is not accepting applications to this RFI. To review the RFI, please . Responses are due no later than 5:00 p.m. ET on January 24, 2022. ###