
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Report CO2 emissions for new cars and vans
  

  
  
  
      
  How vehicle manufacturers should report CO2 emissions for their vehicles.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Transport

      
      Published
      31 December 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Regulating and reporting CO₂ emissions of new cars and vans

CO₂ emissions from cars and vans newly registered in the UK were previously governed by European Union (EU) regulations.

Data was gathered each year on fleets across Europe, and manufacturers who failed to meet their CO₂  targets  were fined.

DfT  has now taken over the application and enforcement of CO₂  standards for GB-registered cars and vans, as of 1 January 2021.

New vehicle registrations data and targets

Under the GB regime, manufacturers are set GB-specific targets which are at least as ambitious as current EU CO₂  emissions targets. These targets are set on the basis of their GB vehicle registrations.

Compliance in GB  is monitored and enforced by the Secretary of State for Transport. The Secretary of State for Transport records and verifies  new GB registrations and notifies  manufacturers of their level of compliance. This is initially done using provisional data.

Manufacturers  then have 3 months to inform DfT about any anomalies within this data, as before.

After this period, DfT will notify manufacturers of the final data and issue any fines for not adhering to their target, known as an ‘excess emissions premium’. The excess emissions premium amount will be at the same rate as before.

Pooling GB registrations

Different manufacturers may come together to bring all, or some, of their registrations under one target. This is known as ‘pooling’. It is usually used by vehicle manufacturing groups to bring all their registrations under one target, although competing manufacturers may also form a pool if they so wish.

Manufacturers  can still group together and pool their GB registrations but must  provide DfT with certain information to do so.

Applying for derogations

Manufacturers can apply for a ‘derogation’ from the overall CO₂  target. Applying for this allows smaller manufacturers, who might not be able to reduce carbon emissions as quickly as their larger counterparts, to receive an adjusted target. This may allow these manufacturers to make the necessary reductions in a more proportional way.

Vehicle manufacturers registering below a certain level of new vehicle registrations per calendar year may apply for a derogation from the overall CO₂  target. Manufacturers seeking a derogation  must apply to DfT and, subject to approval, may receive an adjusted CO₂  emissions target effective from that reporting period onwards.

Applying for credits for eco-innovations

Currently, new vehicle types undergo a standardised emissions test in order to determine the level of CO₂  emitted by the vehicle. Manufacturers and parts suppliers may however develop technologies that reduce emissions in the real-world, but that are not taken into account during this emissions test.

An example is the use of LED efficient lightbulbs. These technologies are known as ‘eco-innovations’.

Previously, manufacturers or parts suppliers had to  apply to the European Commission to have these eco-innovations approved as CO₂  reducing technologies, and vehicle manufacturers then applied  these technologies to the vehicle in return for CO₂  emissions ‘credits’.

Manufacturers or suppliers can  apply for eco-innovation approvals for vehicle technologies that contribute towards CO₂  reductions but that are not part of CO₂  test procedures. Technologies that were previously approved as eco-innovations are still recognised as such by the DfT.

New technologies need to be approved separately by DfT.  Manufacturers  can continue to receive CO₂  emissions credits for the deployment of approved eco-innovations on their vehicles.

Registering vehicles in the UK, GB and EU


The regulations work on the basis of where the vehicle is registered for use, so any new cars or vans registered in GB after 1 January 2021  are covered by the GB-specific regulations, regardless of where they were manufactured. This is  subject to falling within the scope of new car and van CO₂  regulations and meeting type-approval requirements.

The EU regulations covering car and van CO₂  emissions had previously been listed in Annex II to the Northern Ireland Protocol, therefore the domestic legislation was prepared on a GB-only basis.

On 17 December 2020, the UK Government and the EU agreed to remove these references from the Northern Ireland Protocol, allowing for Northern Ireland-registered vehicles to be regulated domestically, and to count toward domestic targets, rather than by the EU regulation.

Further information on how vehicles registered for use in Northern Ireland are to be regulated will be set out in due course.





      
        
    Published 31 December 2020



          
      

  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Appeal a Motorcycle Single Vehicle Approval (MSVA) decision
        Individual Vehicle Approval (IVA) for lorries and goods vehicles: help to get a pass
        Apply for a vehicle approval test at a non-DVSA site
        Create a trailer brake Individual Vehicle Approval (IVA) model report
        Individual Vehicle Approval (IVA): vehicle side guards (lateral protection devices)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Road transport emissions
        Brexit
        Brexit: business guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    