
    
    

        
        
        
     consumption growth engine—miss Asia and you could miss half of the global picture, a $10 trillion consumption growth opportunity over the next decade. Scale continues to be a key characteristic, but the story of the next ten years and beyond is one of rising diversity in consumer markets in this already diverse region amid significant social, demographic, and technological change.
	
Three changes in perspective are key to understanding the new consumption paths being blazed by Asia’s consumers. First, as incomes rise across Asia, more consumers will reach the highest tiers of the income pyramid, and movement within the consuming class is likely to be a larger driver of consumption growth than movement into it. Second, cities will continue to drive consumption growth, but promising sources of growth are increasingly diverse cohorts within cities, such as Insta-grannies in Seoul, Generation Z gamers in Surabaya, career moms in Manila, and lifestyle-indulging digital natives in Chengdu. Third, as the relationship between income and consumption breaks down in some instances, new consumption curves are emerging in specific product categories. Income-driven S-curves may flatten or shift as business innovation and new technologies enable more people, even on lower incomes, to afford goods and services. Part of a series on the future of Asia, this research focuses on the region’s consumer markets, surveying the outlook for consumption and identifying major shifts in consumption patterns and behavior over the next decade. While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect economies in Asia and around the world in fall 2021, this research aims to look beyond the economic effects of the pandemic, focusing on the factors that may influence long-term consumption growth in Asia to 2030 and beyond. From people moving into the consuming class to moving within the consuming class Asian consumers are expected to account for half of global consumption growth in the next decade, equivalent to a $10 trillion opportunity. Globally, one of every two upper-middle-income and above households is expected to be in Asia, and one of every two consumer transactions is likely to occur in the region.An increasing number of people are projected to join the consuming class, defined as spending more than $11 a day in 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP) terms. In 2000, only 15 percent of Asia’s population was part of the consuming class; the incomes of the remaining three billion people were still insufficient to support discretionary spending. However, over the next decade, a significant reversal is likely. By 2030, three billion people, or 70 percent of Asia’s total population, may be part of the consuming class. Members of the consuming class are expected to attain higher income levels than ever before, shifting the center of gravity of the income pyramid sharply upward and changing consumption patterns. In the past 20 years, 80 percent of Asia’s consumption growth came from lower income tiers of the consuming class as new entrants joined. In the next decade, 80 percent of that growth could come from higher-income consumers (Exhibit 1).
    
From people moving to cities to diversifying segments within citiesIn the past, companies wishing to understand the granularity of growth in Asia mostly focused on which cities would experience the most rapid growth. Cities are likely to continue to be the main source of the region’s consumption growth and are expected to account for more than 85 percent of it over the next decade. Rising incomes are one important aspect of consumption growth, but focus needs to turn to increasingly diverse consumer cohorts within cities that are driving that growth. As social, demographic, and technological transformations collide, ten consumer shifts stand out across Asia that could offer new angles on growth (Exhibit 2).
    

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
From income-driven S-curves to market-specific consumption curvesAs companies respond to the diversifying Asian consumer landscape with new offerings, business models, and technology-enabled innovation, the conventional relationship between income and consumption patterns is breaking down in some categories. As a result, categories for which penetration was previously well predicted by income levels are now subject to new forces that companies and investors could usefully factor into their thinking. Alongside income-driven S-curves are new market-specific consumption curves. An example is “access curves” emerging in categories such as mobility, gaming, and banking, where business model innovation and digital platforms unlock latent demand by enabling lower-income consumers to obtain services that they could not previously access or were priced out of (Exhibit 3). In private vehicle–based mobility, for instance, the penetration of car ownership follows a well-established S-curve, experiencing a sharp increase when countries reach sufficiently high incomes. However, in the case of new mobility solutions such as ride hailing, penetration is much less dependent on income. Even in categories where a strong relationship with income continues, S-curves may shift as a result of cost innovation, with tipping points occurring at an earlier stage in economies’ development. Examples include smartphones and LED lights. 
    
Between 15 and 65 percent of value pools may follow different consumption curves over the next decadeA significant proportion of demand is migrating to market-specific consumption curves, but the size of this shift is likely to differ by sector. In three sectors reviewed—automotive, CPG, and financial services—between 15 and 65 percent of value pools could follow new consumption curves (Exhibit 4). In automotive, the shift could be as high as 65 percent of value. In financial services, 15 to 25 percent could shift. The relative importance of the ten consumption shifts may differ by sector, too. 
    
Companies need to consider how these shifts could play out in their sector, how much value could shift, and the impact of those shifts on the sector’s competitive dynamics. Markets that would be deemed unripe for entry using an income-driven S-curve framework are already being served by companies that succeed in innovating their business model or cost structure. It is time for companies to redraw their consumer growth map of AsiaEach company has a map of growth, but this can all too easily become outdated without a concerted effort to understand and track dynamically changing markets. Companies may need to rethink how demand for their products and services is likely to evolve and to look carefully at which of the ten growth angles are relevant to their businesses. In the automotive sector, players may capitalize on the big convergence by investing in connectivity services, in-car entertainment, and interfaces with local ecosystems and super apps. They need to consider how to unlock new demand through innovation in business models or product development. In financial services, new financial inclusion access curves could open up new opportunities to meet previously underserved demand. For instance, they could capitalize on customers’ leapfrogging directly to digital wallets by using this shift as a launch pad to expand and offer other products. With a refreshed growth map, companies may then consider adopting a more agile operating model, including bolder resource reallocation; increase the speed of innovation in order to get to market more quickly; empower local decision makers, given that centralized decision making and execution are not likely to be sufficient to capture the nuances of local markets; and ensure that the company board is digitally savvy. Companies not only need to be agile but also need to take an open, networked approach. In increasingly diverse and dynamic markets, it is likely to be hard for any company to be all things to all consumers, and for many, a promising way forward may be in partnerships and ecosystems. Companies need to decide whether to lead their own ecosystem or participate in an existing one, depending on which role they could fulfil most effectively. They need to be able to navigate new digital ecosystems and handle much larger amounts of data, and often the most effective way to do this is within partnerships. 