You hopefully have some of our STEM programs on your radar, like our , ®, and  and . But, did you know there’s hundreds more programs out of our national laboratories and program offices? November 8 is National STEM Day, and we’re celebrating by taking a look at some of these amazing STEM programs we offer through DOE and the Labs. The Energy Earthshots Initiative, launched at the U.S. Department of Energy this year, is aimed at accelerating breakthroughs of clean energy solutions within the decade. The first Earthshot announced is the Hydrogen Shot, an all-out effort to reduce the cost of clean hydrogen by 80% to $1 per 1 kilogram in 1 decade – and to train the diverse workforce needed to make this a reality. Enter the  an opening for 1-2 current Bachelors’, Masters’, and Doctoral students to come work with us on clean hydrogen production and infrastructure research. Applications are accepted on a rolling basis.   When you think of , biofuels, or , does algae ever come to mind? Did you know that DOE has free resources to expand your knowledge about algae beyond the sea, to discover how algae is used in sustainable everyday products (like the examples above!). The  is a collaboration between the  and the  that shares education and learning opportunities for students and professionals, including the  for grades K-12, a  program for professionals, biotechnology curriculums, and more. Geared towards: K-12, professionals, and teachers A widely-popular program for high school students in the Chicagoland area is the  The annual program brings inspiration, knowledge, and tips for exploring STEM careers directly to high school students with the aim of advocating for greater gender diversity in the STEM workforce. At the annual event, Argonne National Laboratory’s female scientists and engineers mentor students on their career goals, provide networking opportunities, and share Argonne’s work to advance science, including global challenges such as combating the climate crisis. DOE’s Office of Nuclear Energy partners with the American Nuclear Society and Discovery Education to provide the highest standard in nuclear science education with . This dynamic, standards-aligned program invites students to explore the many applications of nuclear science and its impact on energy, healthcare, food, and the environment through an interactive suite of free resources. Explore STEM project starters, digital lesson plans, and exciting  where you can learn about different careers in nuclear science. Talk about winds of change! The  program is spurring student interest in wind energy and helping train the workforce of tomorrow. The program provides  and  hands-on education and experience through the  of a wind turbine at . With more than  at host schools across 12 states, Wind for Schools has already introduced thousands of students to wind energy concepts.   Want to tackle climate change?  is currently accepting applications for their Summer 2022 program. This research program is under the Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM) and catered to undergraduate and graduate students in STEM majors seeking to gain experience in energy research. Participants will complete a cutting-edge research project at one of DOE's national laboratories or at DOE headquarters under the mentorship of our scientists and engineers. Participants will also receive a stipend, travel and housing assistance. And the best part is that you will contribute to the FECM mission of minimizing the environmental impacts of fossil fuels while working towards net-zero emissions!  Application deadline is January 10, 2022.  is a collection of science-themed videos from DOE Jefferson Lab's Science Education group. Geared primarily towards middle school students, each Frostbite Theater video takes a quick, focused look at one topic. Whether it's learning how to draw an atom or doing a virtual experiment with electromagnets, Frostbite Theater has you covered. Have you ever wondered what happens in the day of a life of a river? A collaboration between Brookhaven National Laboratory, the New York Department of Environmental Conservation, and the Central Pine Barrens Joint Planning and Policy Commission, explores this very question through their  program.   Each year, over 1,500 students and teachers, representing dozens of schools, take a day to go into the field to collect biodiversity and water chemistry data from several Long Island rivers and estuaries. Students and teachers explore careers in environmental science gathering data and samples side-by-side with the many local, state, and federal agency scientists that volunteer their time. Students and teachers learn proper data collection techniques and how to use scientific equipment in the field. The students, teachers, and community stakeholders experience what place-based environmental stewardship is all about. And wait, there’s so many more! , our one-stop-shop for STEM activities at the Department of Energy, to browse through our activities by audience (K-12, college & continued learning, teachers, and workforce). Don’t miss any of the action by signing up for our monthly . ###