    



 across the US healthcare ecosystem. Medicaid was no exception. As Medicaid enrollment grew rapidly, communities with high socioeconomic need also suffered disproportionate impact from the pandemic


Medicaid faces some unique factors that further expand near-term uncertainty. These include changes in member mix resulting from economic recovery and reduced unemployment, federal and state policies that change with the end of the public health emergency, patterns of care use, and the health impact of the pandemic itself within this highly heterogenous segment of approximately 80 million Americans.


This brief describes the four trends that capture the evolution of the managed Medicaid landscape through the pandemic, followed by actions stakeholders can consider as they prepare for 2022 and beyond.Major trends in Medicaid in 2020–21Growth in enrollment in Medicaid and in managed MedicaidTotal Medicaid enrollment grew by around ten million


 between Q1 2020 and Q1 2021. Drivers of Medicaid enrollment include:
    
    
    
    

		
	
During the same period, managed Medicaid enrollment grew by approximately 11 million (a 20 percent increase), driven by an increase in Medicaid enrollment and a shift from fee-for-service to managed Medicaid.


Large health plans continue to grow at a faster pace than the rest of the marketThe top ten Medicaid health plans in 2020 grew 12 percent per year between 2010 and 2020, compared with 2 percent for the rest of the market during the same period (Exhibit 1). The faster growth among the top ten plans may be attributed to both organic growth (for example, greater success in Medicaid RFPs by offering a strong value proposition for beneficiaries) and investment in inorganic growth opportunities.
    
Continued variability in financial performancePre-tax operating margin for the managed Medicaid market consistently declined from 2015 to 2019 (from 3.9 percent to 0.1 percent of premium), and rebounded in 2020 to 2.3 percent of premium (Exhibit 2).


 The margin improvement of 2.2 percentage points observed in Medicaid (2020 compared with 2019) was higher than in other lines of business (around 1.5 percentage points for Medicare Advantage and Commercial fully insured).


 Medical costs were lowered by factors including reduced utilization of care and lowered acuity mix (partially driven by the pause on eligibility redeterminations). These factors were partially offset by direct COVID-19-related costs (for example, cost of COVID-19 testing, cost of COVID-19-related hospitalizations).



    
Margins varied across Medicaid plan types in the managed Medicaid marketMargin for Medicaid plans with more than ten million member months (around 800,000 members) was, on average, 2.7 percent (Exhibit 3). Average margin for midsize plans, with between 500,000 and two million member months, was at 0.8 percent. Finally, plans with fewer than 500,000 member months, which are typically local and focus on complex, high-needs populations, achieved an average margin of 1.6 percent.



    

		
	
Actions managed care organizations can consider to better serve beneficiaries
    
    
    
    
Beyond the impact of the pandemic, federal and state actions to modify program design can have substantial impact on the future of Medicaid. Medicaid stakeholders who effectively navi­gate both medium-term volatility and program shifts would be well positioned to define a better “next normal” for beneficiaries.