
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Marine planning and development
  

  
  
  
      
  The 12-stage process on how a marine plan is made from selection to implementation and monitoring and how you can get involved.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Marine Management Organisation

      
      Published
      11 June 2014
      Last updated
      
        22 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          1. Select plan area

        
        
          2. Agree how and when interested people will be involved

        
        
          3 and 4. Initial preparation (identify issues and gather evidence)

        
        
          5. Agree vision and objectives

        
        
          6. Develop options

        
        
          7 and 8. Draft plan produced

        
        
          9. Consultation

        
        
          10. Independent investigation (if required)

        
        
          11. Final plan approved and adopted

        
        
          12. Implement, monitor and review

        
        
          How to get involved with Marine Planning

        
        
          Contact information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

If you would like more information about marine planning please email planning@marinemanagement.org.uk.



How a marine plan is made: Marine planning process

1. Select plan area

The Marine Management Organisation (MMO) considers how much information is available in the area and what this tells us about how a marine plan could benefit the plan area. MMO considers:


  how ready the relevant interested people are to take part in the process
  existing coastal partnerships – groups of interested people and organisations
  important environmental zones in the plan areas
  future pressures on the marine area
  how inshore and offshore plan areas work together
  how the marine plan would  work alongside / coordinate with planning on land


2. Agree how and when interested people will be involved

MMO engages locally to agree who will be involved in the plan production process, and when and how this will happen. The Secretary of State must approve the Statement of Public Participation (SPP).

3 and 4. Initial preparation (identify issues and gather evidence)

The process of collecting and analysing scientific data begins in consultation with interested parties.
A marine plan must be built on a strong evidence base, and a thorough understanding of the activities and resources in a plan area. MMO will publish a summary of issues and evidence for each plan area, this is the foundation on which a marine plan is developed.

When collecting evidence for a marine plan MMO focuses on the priorities identified in the Marine Policy Statement (MPS). These activities will be assessed against economic, social and environmental considerations. MMO prefers data in a geographic information system (GIS) format where possible. If you cannot provide your data in GIS format, it can still be considered, but it may take longer to incorporate into the marine evidence base.

We already hold a significant level of data and evidence on the English marine area, gathered from a number of existing sources to support marine planning. This information can be viewed on Explore Marine Plans which displays the appropriate marine policy documents for all of England’s marine plan areas in an accessible online, quick reference format. You can find and zoom in on particular areas or activities of interest - from wind farm developments to conservation areas.

You can submit data using the online evidence submission form and email it to marineplanningevidence@marinemanagement.org.uk.

MMO will assess the data and respond within 20 working days. You can email evidence if the electronic file is 15 MB or less, or send it by post as a CD or DVD.

Additionally, lessons learned and evidence produced in previous marine plan areas is considered in future plan making.

5. Agree vision and objectives

The high level marine objectives and overall long-term vision are the starting point for the plan. 
The Marine Policy Statement sets high level marine objectives for the UK which reflect the principles of sustainable development. The objectives are:


  achieving a sustainable marine economy
  ensuring a strong, healthy and just society
  living within environmental limits
  promoting good governance
  using sound science responsibly


These objectives will be delivered in all marine plan areas through a variety of means, but principally by developing marine plan policies to address the issues facing their achievement.

The vision for each marine plan area is developed after engaging with stakeholders with an interest in the area.

6. Develop options

MMO considers different ways of achieving the plan objectives and vision, to make sure that the choices made and their implications have been considered.

Some elements of this process, such as the sustainability appraisal are legally required as part of the planning process. A sustainability appraisal allows MMO to assess how a marine plan will affect environmental, social or economic sustainability. A Habitats Regulations assessment will form part of the appraisal process.
The MMO considers it best practice to present draft options for issues in each marine plan area, summarising how the objectives and vision are proposed to be achieved, as part of the stakeholder engagement process.

Iterative process

The process of marine planning has been updated for the north west, north east, south east and south west marine plan development. An iterative process is the process of getting to the desired end result by means of repeating cycles of operation. This allows us to repeat processes which lead to the formation of draft policies and re-visit stages in the planning wheel as and when required.

7 and 8. Draft plan produced

Following the options stage, plan policies are developed. Applying the policies in the plan should help to achieve the vision and objectives. Policies inform decisions about applications, licenses and authorisations (things that require approval) and enforcement.

Policies are written to take into account existing legislation and obligations at national and international level. This includes those within the Marine Policy Statement and Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009. Local land-based plans are also considered.

MMO produces the draft marine plan and presents it to the Secretary of State, together with the draft sustainability appraisal, for approval to be published for consultation.

9. Consultation

The draft plan is presented for formal public consultation using several methods:


  direct email to interested people
  press release
  local media
  marine planning newsletter or marine developments blog
  online through government, agency and third party websites
  
MMO offices
  meetings and public drop-in sessions
  consultation with bordering and international countries


At the end of the consultation, MMO analyses responses and produces a summary report. Those who submitted responses are notified of publication of the report.

10. Independent investigation (if required)

If substantial unresolved issues remain after the consultation process, the Secretary of State will consider whether an independent investigation is required. If so, the Secretary of State will appoint an independent person, likely to be the Planning Inspectorate, to investigate the unresolved issues. It would aim to complete its report within 6 months.

See a brief guide to independent investigations.

11. Final plan approved and adopted

The plan is reviewed and amended as necessary in response to comments and the investigation report (if applicable) is then presented to the Secretary of State for approval and adoption.

MMO will produce and publish, once approved:


  adopted marine plan
  implementation plan and monitoring plan
  sustainability appraisal
  modification report


12. Implement, monitor and review

MMO must review and monitor the effectiveness of the plans and related policies every 3 and 6 years. If a review shows that changes are required, steps will be taken to do so, with further public consultation.

MMO will produce and publish monitoring reports and plan reviews (if needed).

How to get involved with Marine Planning

For more information, see ‘How do I get involved in marine planning’.

Each marine plan area has a Statement of Public Participation (SPP) that sets out who will be involved and how and when this will happen. The SPP for each plan is approved by the Secretary of State at the start of the planning process.


  North east marine plans SPP
  North west marine plans SPP
  South east marine plans SPP
  South west marine plans SPP
  East marine plans SPP
  South marine plans SPP


An interactive tool – Explore Marine Plans - explains how marine plans apply to different marine sectors and geographic areas. It highlights policies that apply to a chosen area to inform plan users, and mapping information makes searching for your area of interest easier.

Contact information

Marine Planning Team

0208 0265 325

planning@marinemanagement.org.uk





      
        
    Published 11 June 2014
    Last updated 22 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 June 2021
              Updated to reference Explore Marine Plans.
            
            
              2 February 2018
              Text updated
            
            
              11 June 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Marine Plans: independent investigations
        Marine planning factsheets
        Submit evidence for marine planning
        Marine plan areas in England
        Statement of public participation - north east, north west, south east and south west

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Marine licensing team service standards

  




      

    Collection

  


        Marine planning in England

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Marine planning

  


  

  


    
  


    