
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Space Exploration Advisory Committee Call for Membership Nominations 2022
  

  
  

  
    
  The UK Space Agency seeks nominations for membership of its Space Exploration Advisory Committee (SEAC).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      30 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Space Exploration Advisory Committee Call for Membership Nominations 2022 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Space Exploration Advisory Committee Call for Membership Nominations 2022 
    
        PDF, 245 KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The UK Space Agency seeks nominations for membership of its Space Exploration Advisory Committee (SEAC).

The SEAC is responsible for advising the Agency on matters relating to robotic and human space exploration programmes. The Committee’s remit includes advising on UK participation in European exploration programmes (including Mars exploration and the International Space Station) and national level activities in support of these programmes. Membership of the SEAC consists of representatives of the academic and industrial communities from across the breadth of relevant subject areas, including biomedicine, fundamental physics, robotics and autonomy, and space science.



        
      

      
    Published 30 November 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        ESA Technology Harmonisation
        Life on Mars? - ExoMars Programme
        UK Space Conference 2019 Technology Harmonisation Presentation
        Third Call for UK InCubed Proposals
        UK strategy on earth observation

  




      

    Collection

  


        UK space missions: case studies and programmes

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Space

  


  

  


    
  


    