
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    List of Disability and Access Ambassadors
  

  
  

  
    
  Disability and Access Ambassadors help to ensure businesses are doing all they can to support their disabled customers.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Disability Unit

      
      Published
      28 July 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    List of Disability and Access Ambassadors 
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

We are currently inviting business leaders to apply to become a Disability and Access Ambassador in one of 5 sectors.


Disability and Access Ambassadors are senior business leaders. They drive improvements in the accessibility and quality of services and facilities in their sector for disabled people, helping to ensure businesses are doing all they can to support disabled customers. The roles are voluntary. They serve for up to 3 years, and are managed by the Disability Unit (part of the Equality Hub).

New ambassadors were appointed in July 2021. Together the new and existing ambassadors cover the following private sector industries:


  advertising (brand and design)
  airports
  arts and culture
  banking
  built environment (products and services)
  buses
  countryside and heritage
  creative Industries
  energy
  hospitality (pubs and restaurants)
  housing (private)
  insurance
  rail travel
  retail
  technology
  universities
  web accessibility


Justin Tomlinson MP, Minister for Disabled People, Health and Work said:

“I am very excited to welcome this incredible, impressive group of people as new Disability and Access Ambassadors. They will help support the existing team with our programme to increase access for disabled people across a wide range of private sector industries, and I am really looking forward to working with them.”

The ambassadors have been helping industry and the government in their response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and supporting work to develop the national disability strategy.



        
      

      
    Published 28 July 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Disability rights

  


  

  


    
  


    