
  
    
      Part B

    

      
        
  Filling in the Excel application appendix

      
        
          

    This was sent to you with your invitation to submit a full application.

This is a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet that you must complete in full and send to us as an Excel attachment with your application email. There are 6 tabs for you to fill in:


  Water Management details
  A - Financial impact
  B - Costs & suppliers
  C - Funding & claims
  D - Project milestones
  E - Water outputs


You should fill in each tab in the order shown above as the information you provide will feed into and prepopulate the data in other tabs.















































































































            

      
        
          
            Water Management details
          
        
        

    We will use the information you enter in this page to score and assess how well the project meets the Water Management theme priorities. The information will also be used to create your project outputs.
Please complete the tables providing information on your current position and your forecast for the future. Current means the existing situation, before undertaking the project. Forecast means what will happen after the project has been completed.
If you wish to explain any of the information you enter in the Water Management tab, please use Question 8.1.5 in the full application to do so.



      
        
          
            Application details
          
        
        

    Please enter your business name, project name and DORA reference number on this page.
Question 1: Select the items that you have included in your grant funded expenditure. Select ‘yes’ or ‘no’ from the drop-down list for each item. You cannot apply for grant towards items that are not included in this list.
Question 2a: Tell us about all the crops you currently irrigate and the irrigation systems you use. Complete the table with information for a typical year.
Using the drop-down options, select the crops that you grow and irrigate. Against each crop, enter the area of land that is irrigated, in hectares. Select from the drop-down options the irrigation method you use for irrigating each crop and the energy source for that system.
You do not have to complete all the rows. 
If you do not currently irrigate any crops leave this table blank.
When completing the Crop Type column, if you grow and irrigate a crop that is not listed, select ‘other’ from the drop-down options. For example, field scale vegetables, other*. Provide details of the ‘other’ crops in Question 8.1.1 of the Full Application Form. We may need to contact you for more information to help us process your application.
Question 2b: Tell us about all the crops and area of land you will irrigate once the project is complete. This should be the total area that will be irrigated, not just the additional area. Complete the table with your annual forecast of what you will grow and irrigate after completing the project. 
Using the drop-down options, select each of the crops you will grow and irrigate. Against each crop enter the area of land that will be irrigated, in hectares. Select from the drop-down options the irrigation method that you will use for irrigating each crop and the energy source for that system.
You do not have to complete all the rows.
When completing the Crop Type column, if you grow and irrigate a crop that is not listed, select ‘other’ from the drop-down options. For example, Field scale vegetables, other*. Provide details of the ‘other’ crops in Question 8.1.1 of the Full Application Form. We may need to contact you for more information to help us process your application.
Question 3: Tell us where the water for your irrigation system currently comes from and where the water for your proposed irrigation system, after the project, will come from. Please note that we can’t support any projects where your proposed irrigation system will be supplied by mains water or summer surface abstraction. 
In the ‘current’ column, against each water source listed, enter the volume of water that you are currently using for irrigation. In the ‘forecast’ column, against each water source listed, enter the total volume of water that you will take from that source for irrigation, after the project is complete. The figures should be m3. Leave blank the water sources that you do not or will not use.
Question 4a and 4b: You must have an abstraction licence in place that allows you to abstract as proposed. In table 4a tell us about the abstraction licences that you have. In table 4b tell us about the new licences that are required to carry out the project activity. Complete the tables with the details of the abstraction licences, providing the licence reference number, name of the Waterbody and the volume of water that can be abstracted. Select from the drop-down boxes the Regional Charging Area, abstraction season and source. In table 4a use the drop-down box to tell us whether you will be surrendering any of the existing licences as a result of the project activity.
Up to three licences can be listed in each table. If you have more than three licences, provide details of the other licences held at Question 8.1.5 in the Full Application Form.
You’ll need to send us a copy of your abstraction licence(s) with your application so we can make sure it:

  is current and for your business
  is in place for a sufficient period
  corresponds with the details in the application
  specifies the period and purpose of abstraction
  specifies the maximum quantity of water to be abstracted and
  does not have any conditions that disagree with the details in the application

We note that any new licences required for the project may have been applied for but may not be in place when you submit your full application, and you may not have the licence reference number.
Where you have not obtained your abstraction licence prior to submitting your application, you must submit evidence from the Environment Agency that you have made a formal application for the relevant abstraction licence(s), and it has been received by them.
Question 5: Tell us about the water storage facilities you currently have and the water storage facilities your project will install. In the ‘current’ column, against each water storage type listed, enter the volume of water that is currently stored. In the ‘forecast’ column, enter the total volume of water that will be stored, after the project. The figures should be m3. Enter 0 against the water storage facilities you do not or will not use. For example, if you currently have a 30,000 m3 reservoir and the project will build a new 50,000 m3 reservoir, enter 30,000 in the ‘current’ column and 80,000 in the ‘forecast’ column.
Question 6: Tell us about any rainwater harvesting for collecting water for crop irrigation on your farm. For each building that is used, or will be used, for rainwater harvesting, complete one row. Enter the length and width of the building and select from the drop-down option whether the roof is pitched or flat.  In the ‘current’ column use the drop-down options to select ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to tell us whether you are currently harvesting rainwater from the roof of each of the buildings listed. In the ‘future’ column use the drop-down options to select ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to tell us whether you will harvest rainwater from the roof of each building listed.
Question 7: Are you currently working collaboratively with or are selling water to other businesses? As a result of the project will you be working collaboratively with or selling water to other businesses in the future?
Provide the name of the business and use the drop-down options to indicate whether you are (current) or will be (forecast) working collaboratively with the business or selling water to them.
If you are working collaboratively, this is a joint venture with a formal agreement with another business(es) to collect and store water and irrigate land for the purpose of growing crops.
Please note that selling water for use other than irrigating crops is not eligible – for example if you intend to sell the water for domestic use or to local shops and businesses.
If you are working collaboratively with or selling water to another business explain the nature of the collaboration or partnership at Question 8.1.2 in the Full Application Form.
Question 8: Select your answer from the drop-down options to tell us whether your project will have a positive environmental impact on a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). If ‘yes’ enter the name of the SSSI that will be impacted.
If the project will positively impact a SSSI explain what the impact will be at Question 8.1.3 in the Full Application Form. If you have any evidence to support your answer, please submit this with your full application. 
An example of a positive impact could include moving from summer abstraction to peak flow abstraction, therefore no longer having a negative impact on the SSSI downstream.
This question is not scored. It is important for us to understand any positive impacts on a SSSI as a result of the project. Projects which have a negative impact on a SSSI will not be supported.
Question 9: Complete the ‘Current FTE’ field with the number of Full Time Equivalent (FTE*) employees currently in your business / organisation. In the ‘Forecast FTE’ field enter the total number of FTEs there will be after the project. The ‘number of jobs’ field will automatically calculate the number of FTE jobs that will be created in the applicant business as a direct result of the project.
*1 FTE is a minimum of 30 hours per week. For example, a person working 15 hours a week would be 0.5FTE and a person working 30 hours a week for 3 months would be 0.25FTE. FTEs include business partners and directors.
For each job that will be created in the applicant business explain at Question 8.1.4 in the Full Application Form what each role is, their key responsibilities, the hours of work per week and when you expect the job will be filled. Explain how you have decided that the type and number of jobs are relevant and appropriate for the project. This question is not scored but we will monitor and record job creation as a project output.



      
        
          
            Declarations
          
        
        

    Please read this section and make sure that you agree with and can meet the requirements set out in it. By submitting and/or agreeing to the submission of the application appendix spreadsheet, you’ll be agreeing to the declaration.
Tab A – Financial impact
We need to understand how the purchase of the equipment or construction of the reservoir will financially benefit your business in the future.
Fill in the table, recording the additional costs or savings as a result of the project. Against each heading, please provide the total income or cost for your business, in £, for two years after the completion of your project and when your project will be operational. For example, when the equipment is used, the crops are grown, and the additional land is irrigated. Please do not amend or add to the headings in this table.
Tab B – Costs & suppliers
For each item of project expenditure, give the supplier’s name, the quoted amount (both excluding and including VAT) and the supplier’s VAT number and company registration number (where applicable).
You must show all costs that are being included in your grant application. Where possible, group the costs into subheadings, for example building costs for pump house, ground works for reservoir construction.
You’ll need to provide these details for each supplier, starting with your preferred supplier and moving to the right to complete each row for the second and third suppliers.
You should also fill in the table under the main project expenditure lines to show any non-grant funded project expenditure that you will incur. This is project spend that is critical to the project, but you aren’t seeking grant support for as it is ineligible for grant, for example, a generator or solar panels to power the reservoir and irrigation equipment.
Tab C – Funding & claims
Much of the information in this tab will be automatically transferred from the detail you provided in Tab B. The first thing you must do is indicate whether you’re including irrecoverable VAT in your project costs. Enter Y/N into the box on line 4. This will mean the correct costs are transferred in from Tab B.
Then enter the grant rate to calculate the grant, for example if you are requesting grant funding at 40%, enter 40 into the grant rate box. Please don’t use a % sign. Once you’ve entered the grant rate, the total grant amount requested will automatically calculate.
The non-grant funded expenditure will automatically show from the table you completed in Tab B. Once you’ve entered the grant rate for each item, check the project cost summary table to make sure all details are correct.
You should then complete the claims table at the right of the tab. You’ll need to put up to 3 claim dates on line 7 (overtype the red Date) and put the eligible cost that you intend to include in each claim for every item. The grant amount will automatically calculate and the totals for each claim will be calculated at the bottom of the table. As you allocate each item of expenditure to a claim, the figure in column N to the right of the claims table will show £0.00 in green. Expenditure remaining to be allocated to claims will remain in red.
When forecasting your claims, consider when you’ll have incurred the cost and paid the invoice in full. You can submit just 1 or 2 claims if needed for your project. Some costs, such as reservoir construction, may be incurred over a longer period of time and you may receive interim invoices as the works are completed. In this situation, you may wish to submit 2 or 3 claims against 1 item. For most costs and for any capital equipment, it is likely that you’ll receive 1 invoice and so will then claim for the full cost after the item has been received, installed and paid for in full.
We won’t normally pay grant on a deposit until the item is fully installed and operational. However, there may be some instances where a large deposit must be paid at the point of ordering, and you are not able to wait until the item is installed and operational before claiming grant on it. If you do need to claim a deposit payment, it shouldn’t be more than 40% of the value of the item and it should be clearly set out in your claim schedule.
Once you’ve filled in the costs and claims table and checked to make sure that the project cost summary is correct, you should scroll down to check that the claim table at the bottom of the tab is also correct. This should accurately show when you intend to submit each claim, the total expenditure included in each claim and the grant amount you intend to claim.
If you have more than 1 claim, you must make sure that the final claim is at least 15% of the total grant amount being requested.
Tab D – Project Milestones
Fill in the table on this tab with the key project milestones/stages for the
implementation of the project and the full dates (for example, 31 August 2023) they have been or are expected to be achieved. Examples might include:

  the start of the reservoir construction work
  key stages in construction for example, completion of ground works
  completion of the pipework to fill the reservoir
  installation of the underground water distribution main
  recruitment of new employees
  new crops are planted
  additional area of land is irrigated
  any additional outputs or targets not listed on Tab E Water outputs that you will achieve following the project and that you will use to assess the success of your project

The project milestones should show the key steps of your project delivery – what you’ll need to do and when.
Tab E – Water outputs
The table on this tab lists all project outputs we expect projects to meet under the Water Management grant.
This table will be populated using information you entered in the Water Management details tab. Check that you are satisfied these are appropriate and achievable. To change the information that appears in the Outputs table you will need to amend the information in the Water management tab.
For each output complete the ‘Year Achieved’ column. Select from the drop-down options to indicate the year when the output will be fully achieved. Year 1 will begin after the project works have been completed and when the project infrastructure and equipment is used, the crops are grown, and the additional area of land is irrigated.
The new products and crops that will be achieved are listed below. This information is taken from the information you enter in the Water Management details Tab.
Be realistic in your forecasts as we will expect to see evidence that all outputs you propose have been achieved. Where evidence isn’t
available or where a project fails to deliver agreed outputs and results, repayment or withdrawal of grant may be considered.
The table below shows definitions of some of the outputs and the evidence you’ll need to collect to evidence you’ve achieved them:

  
    
      Output
      Definition
      Evidence required
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
    
  
  
    
      Increase in land area irrigated   (ha)
      As a result of the project there   will be an increase in the area of land that is irrigated (ha) annually.
      The Full Application Form, claims, site visits and   monitoring reports will show us whether there has been an increase in land   area irrigated as a result of the project.      You should establish systems and   processes to record the total area of land that is irrigated annually and   records to demonstrate the additional irrigated area enabled by the project.      You will also need to record the   crops that area grown and irrigated each year and the method of irrigation   used.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
    
      Increase in reservoir storage   capacity (m3)
      The project will build a new water   storage reservoir. Details of the volume of the reservoir (m3) must be   provided.
      The Full Application Form, quotes, claims, invoices,   photographs and site visits will show us whether the reservoir storage   capacity has increased. Ensure that you keep records to evidence the size of   the reservoir created and the volume of water that can be stored.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
    
      Number of businesses benefiting
      A business will directly benefit   from the project if it is receiving water for crop irrigation using the new   project equipment and infrastructure.
      Documentation demonstrating the   volume of water received used by all businesses for crop irrigation, from the   new project equipment and infrastructure, each year must be provided in   annual monitoring reports. This may include letters or emails from the   businesses to explain the volume of water they have received, or a copy of an   invoice which shows the volume of water sold.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
    
      Number of     FTE jobs     created
      A job created is a new, permanent,     paid full time equivalent (FTE) job   that     will be created as a direct result   of the     project. The job must not have   existed     with that employer in the UK prior   to     the project being carried out. A   job     ‘safeguarded’ by the project does   not     count as a job created.     A ‘permanent’ job means it will be in     place for at least 1 year from the   point at     which it is filled.     ‘FTE’ means the job must be a   minimum     of 30 hrs per week. Part time jobs     should be calculated on a pro-rata   basis     e.g. 1 part time job working 15 hrs   a     week counts at 0.5 FTE.     Voluntary work cannot be counted as   a     job created, but self-employment   can     be.     Seasonal jobs may be counted where     this is normal practice for an   industry,     the job must exist for a minimum of   4     weeks per annum, and are counted on     a pro-rata basis. e.g. 1 seasonal   job in     place for 4 weeks would equate to   0.08     FTE.     A job is considered to have been     created once the post is advertised.     Apprenticeship positions funded   through an apprenticeship scheme must not be included under jobs created.
      Written confirmation from     a senior member of staff     from the supported business     confirming the creation     of a post as a result of the     support provided. This should     include details of its start     date, duration and number of     hours.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
    
      Number     of new     techniques
      A new technique is a new piece of   technology that is introduced to the business.  The piece of technology will not currently   be used by the business.
      The Full Application Form, claims, photographs,   monitoring reports and site visits will show us if a new technique has been   created for the business.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
    
      Number     of new     products
      A new product will be when a new   crop is grown and irrigated as a result of the project. These are crops that   are not currently grown and irrigated by the business.
      You will need to tell us in your   claim forms and monitoring reports the area of crops that are grown and   irrigated year.      You should establish systems and   processes to record and evidence the crops that are grown and irrigated each year.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
    
      Reduction in annual summer surface   water abstraction licenced volume (m3)
      The amount of annual summer surface   water abstraction that has been reduced (m3) as a result of the project.
      The Full Application Form will show us if annual   summer surface water abstraction has been reduced.      Claim forms and monitoring reports   should provide details of the current abstraction licences held by the   business.
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
    
  





        
  
