
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Automatic Monitoring and Targeting (aM&T) Sub-metering Systems Checklist and Statement template
  

  
  

  
    
  A Checklist and Statement template for manufacturers and suppliers of Energy Technology List compliant aM&T sub-metering systems.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      25 April 2018
      Last updated
      
        1 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Automatic Monitoring and Targeting (aM&T) Sub-metering Systems Checklist and Statement template
    
        PDF, 270KB, 5 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
For manufacturers and suppliers with aM&T sub-metering systems, the Checklist and Statement template provides a format for checking compliance with the ETL criteria and making a statement to customers of compliance.




        
      

      
    Published 25 April 2018
    Last updated 1 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 April 2020
              On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the ECA and First Year Tax Credits Scheme (FYTC) will end from April 2020 for products on the ETL. This ETL publication has been updated to remove references to the ECA.
            
            
              25 April 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    