
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Animal welfare
  

  
  
  
      
  Advice and guidance on protecting animal welfare on farms, in transport, at markets and at slaughter.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and Animal and Plant Health Agency

      
      Published
      9 April 2013
      Last updated
      
        29 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales

                Guidance for Northern Ireland


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          On-farm animal welfare

        
        
          Legislation

        
        
          European conventions on animal welfare

        
        
          Animal welfare during transport

        
        
          Transporting animals in Great Britain

        
        
          Transporter authorisations

        
        
          Vehicle inspection and approval scheme

        
        
          Satellite navigation systems

        
        
          Complete training

        
        
          Certificates of competence

        
        
          Journey logs

        
        
          Animal transport certificates

        
        
          Contingency plans

        
        
          Transporting animals into the EU

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guide provides advice on the legislation and codes of practice designed to protect animal welfare on farms, in transport, at markets and at slaughter.

On-farm animal welfare

Specific guides on animal welfare issues are available for the following:


  Poultry farming: welfare regulations
  Laying hens: welfare regulations
  Broiler chickens and breeder chickens: welfare regulations
  Pig farming: welfare regulations
  Sheep and goats: welfare regulations
  Beef cattle and dairy cows: welfare regulations
  Deer farming: health and welfare


See also:


  Poultry welfare off the farm
  Livestock at farm shows and markets: welfare regulations
  Slaughter of livestock: welfare regulations
  Animal welfare in severe weather
  Animal welfare legislation: protecting pets


Gamebirds

The code of practice for the welfare of gamebirds was approved by Parliament and came into force in January 2011. The code provides game farmers with information on how to meet the welfare needs of their animals, as required under the Animal Welfare Act 2006. It can also be used in courts as evidence in cases brought before them relating to poor welfare of gamebirds.


  Code of Practice for the Welfare of Gamebirds reared for Sporting Purposes
  Impact      Assessment – Code of Practice for the Welfare of Gamebirds Reared for      Sporting Purposes (PDF, 446KB, 20 pages)


Fish

In addition to the general requirements of the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 we are working towards further improvements in fish welfare by other means.

The Council of Europe’s Standing Committee on the welfare of animals kept for farming purposes adopted a recommendation on fish in December 2005. Defra’s research and development programme includes projects on certain aspects of fish welfare. We will use the findings to support our objective to ensure high standards of fish welfare.

Ducks and geese

The welfare of ducks and geese is protected by the general requirements of the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007. There is also a Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Ducks, which continues to apply under the new Animal Welfare Act.

Rabbits

The welfare of rabbits is protected by the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007. Schedule 9 of these regulations contains specific conditions that apply to the keeping of rabbits. There is also a Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Rabbits, which continues to apply under the new Animal Welfare Act.

As there is no longer an industry body for commercial rabbit keepers, we would welcome commercial farmers contacting us via: animal.welfare@defra.gov.uk to give their details for future consultation.


  Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Rabbits


Turkeys

The welfare of turkeys are protected by the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007. There is also a Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Turkeys which continues to apply under the new Animal Welfare Act.


  Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Turkeys


Ratites (emu, ostrich, rhea)

The farming of emu, ostrich and rhea (ratites) caters for a niche market in the UK. The welfare of ratites are protected by the general requirements in the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007. There are also Council of Europe recommendations on the welfare of farmed ratites which offer guidance on the standards that should apply.


  Council of Europe recommendations on the welfare of farmed ratites


The existing Codes of Recommendations for the welfare of livestock continue to apply, however, with the introduction of the Act and the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007, the references to the legislation throughout the code are now out of date. Whilst the vast majority of the 2000 regulations are replicated by the 2007 regulations, you should check the legislation as it currently stands.

Legislation

The Animal Welfare Act 2006 (the 2006 Act) is the principal law relating to animal welfare.

Owners and keepers have a duty of care to their animals and must make sure they meet their needs:


  for a suitable environment and place to live
  for a suitable diet
  to exhibit normal behaviour patterns
  to be housed with, or apart from, other animals (if applicable)
  to be protected from pain, injury, suffering and disease


Anyone who does not provide for an animal’s welfare needs may:


  be banned from owning animals
  face an unlimited fine
  be sent to prison for up to 6 months


The 2006 Act also sets out offences relating to cruelty and animal fighting. The maximum sentence for these offences is 5 years imprisonment and/or an unlimited fine.

Animal cruelty includes:


  causing unnecessary suffering to an animal
  mutilation
  docking the tail of a dog except where permitted
  poisoning an animal


The 2006 Act applies to all vertebrate animals.

The welfare of farmed animals is additionally protected by The Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended), which are made under the Animal Welfare Act.

The welfare of all farmed animals is protected by the Animal Welfare Act 2006 which makes it an offence to cause unnecessary suffering to any animal. The Act also contains a duty of care to animals - anyone responsible for an animal must take reasonable steps to make sure the animal’s welfare needs are met.

The Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 set minimum standards for all farm animals. These regulations replaced the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2000 on 1 October 2007. The new regulations are made under the Animal Welfare Act 2006 and are very similar to the previous regulations.


  Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007
  Guidance to the 2007 Regulations (PDF, 82.6KB, 2 pages)


The Welfare of Animals at Markets Order 1990 (WAMO) contains rules covering the treatment of animals in markets to ensure they are not caused injury or unnecessary suffering. They also set out detailed arrangements in respect of penning, food and water and the care of young animals. Responsibility for enforcing WAMO rests with local councils.

The welfare of farmed animals is additionally protected by the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 as amended (S.I. 2007 No.2078), which are made under the Animal Welfare Act.


  Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007
  Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2010


These regulations continue to implement EU directives on the welfare of calves, pigs, laying hens, conventionally reared meat chickens and a general welfare framework directive, which sets down minimum standards for the protection of all farmed livestock.

The regulations cover all farmed animals. Schedule 1 (which does not apply to fish, reptiles or amphibians) contains specific requirements such as inspections, record keeping, freedom of movement, buildings and equipment and the feeding and watering of animals. Some species, however, are subject to additional provisions, which are set out in Schedules 2-9.

Guidance has been prepared to accompany the regulations and includes information on the application of the legislation to common land. Interim guidance whilst the relevant code of recommendations is under review, is available on the rules on conventionally reared meat chicken.


  
Farmed Animals – Council Directive 98/58/EC concerning the protection of animals kept for farming purposes (PDF, 49.6KB, 5 pages) (PDF)


Similar legislation exists in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland (NI). For further information on animal welfare legislation in these areas please contact the Defra helpline and ask for the On-farm Animal Welfare Team on 03459 33 55 77.

European legislation

EU minimum welfare standards are already in place for farmed animals, laying hens, calves and pigs.


  Laying hens – Council Directive 1999/74/EC laying down minimum standards for the protection of laying hens (PDF, 57KB, 5 pages)
  Conventionally reared meat chickens – Council Directive 2007/43 laying down minimum rules for the production of chickens kept for meat production (PDF, 72.4KB, 10 pages)
  Calves - Council Directive 97/2/EC amending Directive 91/629/EEC laying down minimum standards for the protection of calves
  Calves - Commission Decision 97/182/EC amending the Annex to Directive 91/629/EEC laying down minimum standards for the protection of calves
  Pigs - Council Directive 2001/88/EC amending Directive 91/630/EEC laying down minimum standards for the protection of pigs
  Pigs - Council Directive 2001/93/EC amending Directive 91/630/EEC laying down minimum standards for the protection of pigs
  Guidance      to the 2007 Regulations (PDF, 82.6KB, 2 pages)


The Treaty of Amsterdam in June 1997 contains a legally binding protocol recognising that animals are sentient beings and requires full regard to be paid to their welfare when policies relating to agriculture, transport, research and the internal market are formulated or implemented.

European conventions on animal welfare

The Council of Europe (CoE) has 5 conventions covering animal welfare including one on the protection of animals kept for farming purposes.


  European Convention for the Protection of Animals Kept for Farming Purposes


The underlying principle of the convention, and its recommendations on the welfare of individual species of livestock, is to set out the conditions necessary to avoid any unnecessary suffering or injury and to take account of physiological and behavioural needs. Current Council of Europe recommendations are listed below.


  Cattle
  Domestic Ducks
  Domestic Fowl
  Domestic Geese
  Fish
  Fur Animals
  Goats
  Muscovy Ducks
  Pigs
  Ratites
  Sheep
  Turkeys


Animal welfare during transport

The welfare of animals during transport is protected by retained EU legislation.

You must transport animals in a way that is not likely to cause injury or undue suffering to them.

When you transport animals you must:


  plan the journey properly and keep it as short as possible
  check the animals during the journey to make sure you meet their needs for water, feed and rest
  make sure the animals are fit to travel
  design, construct and maintain the vehicle and loading and unloading facilities to avoid injury and suffering
  make sure anyone handling the animals are trained or competent in the task and do not use violence or any methods likely to cause unnecessary fear, injury or suffering
  give the animals sufficient floor space and height


Legislation on the protection of animals during transport applies to the transport of live vertebrate animals in connection with an economic activity (a business or trade). This includes:


  livestock and equine hauliers
  farmers
  commercial pet breeders
  pet couriers


The requirements apply to those working at:


  markets
  assembly centres
  slaughterhouses


The requirements do not apply to the transport of animals where this is not in connection with economy activity. For example, journeys which are:


  not in the course of business or trade
  not for hire or reward


Enforcement

Welfare during transport is enforced by local councils. Trading standards officials carry out welfare checks on animals and means of transport. They will take appropriate enforcement action up to and including prosecution.

The Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) carries out enforcement checks at markets, ports, roadside and at supervised loadings of export consignments. They enforce compliance with journey times through checks of journey documentation.

If you are concerned about the treatment of an animal during transport contact the local council (normally the trading standards department) or APHA.

Animals transported by air

The International Air Transport Association (IATA) sets out the requirements for transporting animals by air. Information on air transport and container requirements can be found on the IATA website on live animal regulations.

Transporting animals in Great Britain

When you transport animals commercially by air, sea, rail or road in Great Britain (England, Scotland and Wales) you must have a GB or NI issued transporter authorisation.

For transport by road you also need:


  a GB or NI issued certificate of vehicle approval - depending on the length of journeys you will be making
  a GB or NI issued certificate of competence or to complete training - depending on the species you are transporting
  a GB or NI issued journey log or an animal transport certificate - depending on the species you are transporting


Transporter authorisations

You must have a transporter authorisation if you transport animals as part of an economic activity (a business or trade), for a distance over 65km.

You will need a:


  type 1 transporter authorisation for journeys over 65km and up to 8 hours
  type 2 transporter authorisation for journeys over 8 hours


Get a transporter authorisation

You need to contact APHA’s Welfare in Transport team for a transporter authorisation application pack. This will include the forms you need to submit, and guidance on what to include in your application.

In your application you will need to declare any:


  Home Office simple cautions or convictions under legislation on the protection of animals
  current court orders restricting ownership, keeping or being in control of animals


This declaration includes you and anyone transporting animals under the authority of your Authorisation. Anyone who has been convicted or given a Home Office simple caution under such legislation, in the 3 years before their application, will normally be refused an authorisation.

Renew your transporter authorisation

Transporter authorisations are valid for up to 5 years.

You should renew your transporter authorisation before it expires. Contact APHA’s Welfare in Transport team for renewal forms.

If you have a type 2 authorisation, your renewal application will need to include:


  a valid UK certificate of vehicle approval

  a valid UK certificate of competence

  details of contingency planning



Vehicle inspection and approval scheme

Road vehicles and containers used to transport animals on journeys over 8 hours, must be inspected and approved by a certifying body.

Certificates of vehicle approval are valid for up to 5 years.

Contact a certifying body to find out how to get a vehicle or container inspected and for information on the approval process.

Logistics UK


Hermes House  
St John's Road  
Tunbridge Wells  
Kent  
TN4 9UZ



Telephone: +44 (0)3717 112 222
Email: customerservices@logistics.org.uk

NSF Certification UK Ltd


Hanborough Business Park  
Long Hanborough  
Oxford  
OX29 8SG



Telephone: +44 (0)1993 885 610
Email: certificationuk@nsf.org

Satellite navigation systems

Vehicles making journeys over 8 hours transporting cattle, sheep, pigs, goats or unregistered domestic equidae need to be equipped with a satellite navigation (tracking) system. There is an exception to this rule for journeys of up to 12 hours within GB.

Read the guidance note on satellite tracking systems for information on the basic functionality of systems. Designated vehicle approval certifying bodies can advise on how to get suitable equipment.

Complete training

Drivers and attendants of vertebrate animals must complete training for:


  fitness for travel
  the means of transport
  use of its facilities
  loading, unloading and handling
  watering and feeding intervals, journey times and rest periods
  space allowances
  documentation


Market and assembly centre staff handling animals must complete training for:


  fitness
  handling
  separation


Training can include:


  on-the-job instruction combined with practical experience
  formal training, such as college courses leading to standards equivalent to qualifications accredited into the national qualifications framework


Certificates of competence

You must have your competence independently assessed if you transport animals by road, on journeys over 65km, in connection with an economic activity. This only applies to domestic species of cattle, sheep, pigs, goats, domestic equidae and poultry.

The assessment may be a:


  theory test - for journeys over 65km and up to 8 hours
  practical assessment of competence including animal handling, and if required, driving skills - for journeys over 8 hours


If assessed as competent, you will receive a certificate of competence. Your certificate will be specific to:


  your role of either transporter or attendant
  the length of journeys you take
  the species you transport


Certificates of competence are valid for life.

The following independent bodies carry out assessments for competence and award competence certificates:

NPCT, Part of City & Guilds Group


Building 500  
Abbey Park  
Stareton  
Warwickshire  
CV8 2LY  



Telephone: 024 7685 7300
Fax: 024 7669 6128
Email: information@cityandguilds.com   
Website: www.nptc.org.uk

Lantra Awards


Lantra House  
Stoneleigh Park  
Warwickshire  
CV8 2LG  



Telephone: 02476 696 996
Fax: 02476 411 655
Email: awards@lantra-awards.co.uk
Website: www.lantra.co.uk

City & Guilds and Lantra Awards are designated to assess for competence and award competence certificates to transport: cattle, sheep, pigs, goats, equines and poultry (including game birds).

1st4Sport


Coachwise Ltd  
Chelsea Close  
Off Amberley Road  
Armley  
Leeds  
LS12 4HP  



Telephone: 01132 907 610
Email: enquiries@1st4sportqualifications.com

1st4Sport is designated to assess for competence and award competence certificates to transport equines only.

Irish certificates of competence

Under the common travel area, Irish and British citizens can move freely and reside in either jurisdiction and enjoy associated rights and entitlements.

Defra will recognise training carried out in Ireland for the purpose of granting driver and attendant certificates of competence.

If you have an Irish certificate of competence, you can apply to APHA by completing an application form. You’ll need to provide a copy of your training and assessment, and your valid certificate of competence.

If you have a GB certificate of competence and want to apply to the RoI, contact the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine (DAFM).

Journey logs

If you export cattle, sheep, pigs, goats or unregistered horses you must have both:


  a UK issued journey log - issued by either DAERA or APHA

  an EU issued journey log


The GB issued journey log must be approved by the APHA Centre for International Trade - Carlisle.

You can get the EU journey log from the competent authority of the first point of entry into the EU. If you depart from NI, you must get the UK journey log from the Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA).

Animal transport certificates

For all other journeys where a journey log is not required, you need an animal transport certificate. This includes for journeys of any distance or duration, and for all species of animals.

An animal transport certificate records:


  origin and ownership of animals
  place of departure and destination
  date and time of departure
  expected duration of journey


Contact APHA’s Welfare in Transport team for an animal transport certificate template.

Contingency plans

If you have a type 2 transporter authorisation, you must have contingency plans to deal with emergencies that can arise during a journey. For example, animals falling ill or getting injured, unforeseen delays, breakdowns or accidents.

You need to submit a contingency plan with your type 2 transporter authorisation application. APHA will provide a template as part of your application pack.

You must document your contingency plans and make them available to the competent authority on request.

Journey organisers need to submit a contingency plan with each new application for a journey log. APHA will give you a form to complete along with your journey log application.

In the case of multiple pick-ups and drop-offs you only need one contingency plan to cover the whole journey. In instances where loads are split, for example at a control post before onward travel to the destination on separate vehicles, only one contingency plan is required but separate instructions may be needed following the consignment being split.

For further guidance on contingency plans contact APHA’s Welfare in Transport team.

Transporting animals into the EU

UK issued transporter authorisations, certificates of competence and certificates of vehicle approval are not valid for use in the EU.

To transport live animals into the EU, UK transporters must apply to an EU member state for a transporter authorisation.

You will need to be represented in the relevant member state. The term representation is not defined in the legislation. You should:


  contact the relevant competent authority for the member state you wish to apply to
  seek independent legal advice, specific to your business
  discuss directly with your relevant trade organisation


You can only hold an authorisation in one member state.

When you apply for an EU issued transporter authorisation you need to submit any required certificate of vehicle approval and certificate of competence. All certificates need to be issued by an EU member state. GB issued certificates are not valid.

You can get contact details for member states to which you wish to apply via the relevant Border Control Posts (BCP).

Live animals may be required to enter the EU via an approved BCP.  Find a list of approved BCP.

Further information


  Farm fires: protecting farm animal welfare
  EU Commission: farm animal welfare
  Protecting pets from cruelty
  Farm Animal Welfare Council (FAWC)
  Animal Welfare Science and Research projects
  Good and Best Practice: for cattle, horses, pigs, poultry and sheep transport
  Livestock transport vehicles: a guide to best practice for vehicle ventilation






      
        
    Published 9 April 2013
    Last updated 29 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 June 2021
              The legislation section has been updated to reflect the changes in maximum sentencing.
            
            
              17 March 2021
              Added that certificates and journey logs need to be GB or NI issued for transport in GB. Updated 'Vehicle inspection scheme and approval' section and Logistics UK contact details.
            
            
              19 January 2021
              Updated telephone number for Logistics UK. 
Updated section on Irish certificates of competence to confirm Defra recognises training carried out in Ireland when granting certificates of competence.
            
            
              6 January 2021
              We updated the transporting animals in Great Britain section to clarify that transporter authorisations issued in Northern Ireland are valid for transport within GB.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              Updated the guidance for animal welfare during transport. To transport live animals into the EU, UK transporters must apply to an EU member state for a transporter authorisation.
            
            
              30 April 2019
              WIT 21 – Guidance notes on the application forms - Welsh version updated
            
            
              24 April 2019
              WIT21 - Guidance notes on the application forms updated
            
            
              7 December 2017
              WIT21 guidance updated
            
            
              4 July 2017
              WIT6 – ATC template updated
            
            
              10 March 2016
              Factual errors fixed
            
            
              11 April 2013
              Added a link to slaughter detailed guide.
            
            
              9 April 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Poultry welfare off the farm
        Keeping farm animals and horses in extreme weather
        Code of practice for the welfare of gamebirds reared for sporting purposes
        Animal welfare legislation: protecting pets

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Travelling circuses: wild animal performance and exhibition
        Animal gatherings: licences

  




      

    Collection

  


        Guidance on importing and exporting live animals or animal products

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Animal welfare

  


  

  


    
  


    