
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Look Out! Maritime Early Warning Innovations
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA has launched the Look Out! Maritime Early Warning Innovations competition which seeks to develop alternative future concepts of Early Warning for the Royal Navy.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Ministry of Defence, and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      11 May 2021
      Last updated
      
        11 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Look Out! Maritime Early Warning Innovations: Competition Document
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Look Out! Maritime Early Warning Innovations: Framework Contract and Schedules
    
        PDF, 762KB, 69 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            


Important update


To submit your SAQ for this competition please follow this link and complete the form.

Please note that the Risk Assessment Reference (RAR) for this completion is RAR-D9M6DGQG and the risk level is “Very Low”. You do not need to answer the questions on pages 3, 4 and 5 which are concerned with higher risk levels. Complete the final declarations on pages 6 and 7 and submit.

The Defence Cyber Protection Partnership (DCPP) will review your SAQ submission and respond with a reference number within 2 working days. The completed SAQ form and resulting email response from DCPP must be downloaded and included within the DASA submission service portal when the proposal is submitted. Please allow enough time to receive the SAQ reference number prior to competition close at midday on 6 July 2021.


This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals for the development of innovative technologies to provide novel methods of Early Warning (EW) for maritime operations. Run on behalf of the Royal Navy, this competition aims to develop alternative future concepts for the Airborne Early Warning systems that currently enable deployed capabilities within the Carrier and Littoral Strike Groups.

£1.25M is available to fund contracts with a maximum value of £250k each. The duration of each of the funded contracts is to be no longer than 9 months. This phase will focus on maturing key underpinning ideas and technologies to demonstrate concept feasibility.

We are looking to undertake continuous development of solutions and our intent is to provide further funding to projects that are demonstrated to be successful during this initial period. Therefore, unlike previous DASA competitions, this is the only planned phase for this call. Further development of solutions beyond the initial period of up to 9 months, will take place through a Framework Contract and tasking.

This competition closes on Tuesday 6 July 2021 at midday BST.

Queries should be sent to accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 11 May 2021
    Last updated 11 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 June 2021
              Updates SAQ Process
            
            
              10 June 2021
              Section 8 Clarification Questions and Answers updated.  Additions and revisions have been marked '(NEW)' and '(REVISED)'.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              Announcement about SAQ submission
            
            
              25 May 2021
              Section 8 Clarification Questions and Answers added to Competition Document
            
            
              11 May 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    