
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    EU General Export Authorisations (EU GEAs)
  

  
  
  
      
  How EU GEA licences authorise the export of specified controlled dual-use goods from Northern Ireland to certain countries outside the EU.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for International Trade and Export Control Joint Unit

      
      Published
      14 August 2012
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to Northern Ireland

                Guidance for Wales
          Guidance for England
          Guidance for Scotland


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction

        
        
          Background

        
        
          Using an EU GEA


        
        
          Contact the ECJU

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guidance applies to exports from Northern Ireland.

For exports from England, Scotland and Wales, see the retained General Export Authorisations (GEAs) detailed guide.

Introduction

EU GEAs permit the export of certain specified dual-use Items from Northern Ireland to certain specified non-EU destinations.

EU GEAs are the European equivalent of the national system of Open General Licences (OGLs) issued under export control law. They are designed to licence dual-use exports.

Dual-use Items are goods, software or technology that can be used for either civil or military purposes. The EU is responsible for issuing legislation in this area which is applicable on an EU-wide basis.

As with OGLs, EU GEAs are legal documents. In order to legally use the authorisations, exporters need to ensure that they meet all the licensing terms and conditions including registering before use with the ECJU.

Read more guidance on export controls: dual-use items, software and technology, goods for torture and radioactive sources).

Background

Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 (otherwise known as the European Union Dual-Use Regulation) establishes an EU-wide regime for the control of exports of dual-use Items, software and technology. This originally included one EU issued licence known as the Community General Export Authorisation (CGEA) listed in Annex II.

On 8 December 2011, the EU published an amending regulation which introduced an amendment to the existing CGEA and an additional set of EU GEAs which are designed to licence certain specified dual-use Items for export to named non-EU destinations. This amendment was published as Council Regulation (EU) No 1232/2011.

There are 6 EU GEAs:


  EU001: exports to Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland (including Liechtenstein) and the United States - note: this was previously known as the Community General Export Authorisation or CGEA.
  EU002: export of certain dual-use Items to certain destinations
  EU003: export after repair/replacement
  EU004: temporary export for exhibition or fair
  EU005: telecommunications
  EU006: chemicals


These EU GEAs came into force on 7 January 2012.

To access each individual licence you can download the complete text of Council Regulation (EU) No 1232/2011 from the Europa website.

To access the republished EU001, you need to read both Annex II published in Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 and the amendments made via Council Regulation 1232/2011.

Scope and conditions of use

Each of the EU GEAs contains:


  a precise list of destinations to which exports are permitted
  a specific list of items that may be exported to those destinations
  a specific set of conditions of use, which must be adhered to when exporting under the particular general authorisation


The items listed on each licence refer to a control entry heading (or ‘rating’) which should be cross referenced to goods described on the EU dual-use list (as published in the EU legislation).


Apply for an export licence using SPIRE.


Using an EU GEA


To establish if you can export under authority of a particular EU GEA, you need to review if you can meet all the terms and conditions of the licence. You must read and understand the licence carefully.

To help you determine if an EU GEA is appropriate for your exports, you can use the OGEL and goods checker tools. This is a database which helps you check whether an Open General Licence (OGL) or an EU GEA provides coverage for a particular item or destination.

Once you have determined that you can use an EU GEA, you must register for the appropriate licence via SPIRE. Registration is a requirement of using the licence.


Apply for an export licence using SPIRE.


Holders of this licence are subject to ECO Compliance Audits. For more information see the guide on compliance and enforcement of export controls.

Contact the ECJU


    Helpline

    
      Export Control Joint UnitDepartment for International Trade
Old Admiralty Building
Admiralty PlaceLondonSW1A 2DY
    

    
        
          Email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 020 7215 4594
        
    

    Contact for general queries about strategic export licensing.



Further information

For further information:


  download Council Regulation (EU) No 1232/2011 from the Europa website
  read European Commission guidance on dual-use controls







      
        
    Published 14 August 2012
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              Guidance now applies to Northern Ireland only.
            
            
              14 December 2017
              Deleted a reference to schedule 5 of the Export Control Order 2008 (SI 2008/3231), as this schedule has itself been deleted from the order.
            
            
              14 August 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Retained General Export Authorisations (GEAs)
        Applying for export licences using SPIRE
        Compliance visits explained
        Exporting in support of UK government defence contracts

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        UK Strategic Export Control Lists

  




      

    Collection

  


        Import and export controls
        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Exporting

  


  

  


    
  


    