
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Smarter Working
  

  
  

  
    
  Information on how the Civil Service-wide Smarter Working Programme is supporting departments to develop modern ways of working for a smarter future.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Civil Service, Cabinet Office, and Government Property Agency

      
      Published
      1 January 2004
      Last updated
      
        17 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Smarter Working - increased interest and pace 
    
        PDF, 943KB, 3 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publiccorrespondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Smarter Working - learning lessons from COVID-19
    
        PDF, 405KB, 4 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publiccorrespondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Civil Service World Smarter Working awards article
    
        PDF, 4.12MB, 4 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publiccorrespondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Smarter working as a concept has a rich history within the Civil Service. From the launch of The Way We Work (TW3) initiative in response to Civil Service Reform in 2012, through to the present day where the Smarter Working Programme is owned by the Government Property Agency (GPA), and accountable through the 2018 Government Estate Strategy.

What is smarter working?
Smarter working empowers us all to make the right decisions about where, when and how we work; optimising the use of workplaces and technology, and realising savings for the taxpayer. It improves productivity through a focus on outputs and enables a better work life balance for all.

How is smarter working being implemented across the Civil Service?
The Government Estate Strategy agreed a commitment with all departments and their executive agencies to implement smarter working by the end of 2022. The Smarter Working Programme established within GPA supports departments (as well as wider government organisations) in implementing smarter working.

Why is smarter working being implemented across the Civil Service?
To support and enable other government programmes and initiatives such as Places for Growth and Beyond Whitehall strategies. Ultimately we want to achieve our goal of making the Civil Service a great place to work that attracts and retains great talent within government.

Like many organisations doing similar work in this space, we get the best results from sharing and learning from others so we’ve published material that we hope is useful in understanding our Smarter Working Programme. If you’d like to know more or have any questions please get in touch with us via:
 gpasmartworkingqueries@gpa.gov.uk

Useful links

  
    Smarter working to a sustainable future - by Jenny Baynes, GPA Smarter Working Business Change Lead
  
  
    Smarter Working in the Age of COVID-19 - by Emma Deeny, GPA External Communications Manager
  
  
    Supporting productivity in our workspaces
  
  
    Building strong teams wherever they are located
  
  
    Work well and wellbeing podcasts
  


Related content
Government Estate Strategy
[Smart working: the quiet revolution](https://civilservice.blog.gov.uk/2016/01/21/smart-working-the-quiet-revolution/]
Civil Service SW blog
2019 Smarter Working Awards
Brilliant Civil Service
Smarter Working animation






        
      

      
    Published 1 January 2004
    Last updated 17 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 November 2020
              Updated the sections and content on the page with the most current information.
            
            
              20 August 2019
              Content updated.
            
            
              1 January 2004
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        The Government Workplace Design Guide
        The Government Property Agency’s service offer
        Government Hub Network
        Government Estate Strategy 2018
        A Brilliant Civil Service: becoming the UK’s most inclusive employer

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability
        Civil service reform

  


  

  


    
  


    