Organizations that instill psychological safety are more likely to innovate quickly, unlock the benefits of diversity, and adapt well to change—all of which have grown in importance during the COVID-19 crisis. In a professional climate that promotes psychological safety, employees feel comfortable asking for help, sharing suggestions informally, or challenging the status quo without fear of negative social consequences.Our  suggests how organizations can foster such an atmosphere. Doing so depends on leaders at all levels learning and demonstrating specific behaviors that help their employees thrive.In a McKinsey Global Survey conducted during the pandemic, just 43 percent of all respondents reported a positive team climate, the most important driver of psychological safety. Addressing this starts at the very top of an organization. By setting the tone through their own actions, leaders have the strongest influence on psychological safety. Three key leader behaviors are:
Senior leaders can act as catalysts, empowering and enabling others by role modeling and reinforcing behaviors they expect from the rest of the team.Organizations that invest in leadership development are more likely to see leader behaviors that foster psychological safety. Employees who reported that their organizations invested a lot in leadership development were more likely to report that their team leaders frequently demonstrated consultative, supportive, and challenging behaviors. They also were 64 percent more likely to rate senior leaders as more inclusive. However, results suggest that the effectiveness of these programs varies depending upon the skills they address.Our findings suggest that focusing on a handful of specific skills, such as sponsorship (enabling others’ success ahead of one’s own) and situational humility (developing a personal-growth mindset), can improve the likelihood that leaders demonstrate the behaviors that foster psychological safety. Investing in  can equip leaders to embody these behaviors and cultivate psychological safety across the organization:The quickening pace of change, and the need for creative, adaptive responses from teams at every level, means psychological safety is more important than ever. Organizations that develop the leadership skills and positive work environment that foster psychological safety can reap many benefits to team health and performance.