Financial-technology companies are changing the face of finance. Over the past ten years, what started mostly as disruption in the payments space has expanded to every corner of finance. Even areas once assumed to be safe are seeing new entrants and competitive threats. Wealth and asset management, wholesale banking, capital markets, regulation and risk (“regtech”), and trade finance are just the most recent areas to see innovation driven by small technology-first players.Whether fintechs ultimately win or lose significant market share may be beside the point; they are redefining customer expectations and continue to . As fintechs are frequently building their entire technology stacks from the ground up, they are highlighting incumbent financial institutions’ weaknesses not only in digital user experiences but also in operational efficiency. Whether a new digital brokerage wins or loses may not matter when customer expectations around brokerage fees change. A retail foreign-exchange fintech having 5 or 50 percent of the market may matter less than retail FX margins disappearing for everyone. Whether the next crops of “neobanks” disrupt retail banking may be less important than their highlighting for users and customers the possibilities of a modern, digital-first experience.As we counsel the leaders of incumbent financial institutions, we often turn to seven potential reactions they can consider. Leaders can seek to pursue a combination of      these options:Critically, the right answer is usually not any one of these options but some mix of them. Each presents complexity and requires careful planning and implementation. Over the last few years, we have seen the most successful incumbent financial institutions move from an exclusive focus on internal transformation and partnerships to an increasing interest in M&A and internal digital-business builds.Ultimately, though, each financial institution is different and should seek its own best strategic response to these competitive threats. One thing is the same, though: fintechs are coming for the value pools throughout the sector by taking full advantage of increased digitization, heightened customer expectations, and operational efficiencies.Alexis Krivkovich is a Senior Partner and Zac Townsend is an Expert Associate Partner, both in McKinsey’s San Francisco office.