
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence
  

  
  

  
    
  Up to £2m is available to fund innovative future windfarm mitigations for UK Air Defence 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Ministry of Defence, and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      5 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        23 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition document: windfarm mitigation for UK Air Defence 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: windfarm mitigation for UK Air Defence
    
        PDF, 435KB, 7 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: windfarm mitigation for UK Air Defence
    
        PDF, 335KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals that can provide future offshore windfarm mitigation for UK Air Defence surveillance; including alternative technologies that could fill or remove gaps in radar coverage.

The competition is funded by the Department for Business, Energy, and Industrial Skills’ (BEIS) Science and Innovation for Climate and Energy (SICE) portfolio; and is undertaken in partnership with the Royal Air Force (RAF), the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), and the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA).

A total of up to £2m is available, intended to fund a number of contracts of up to £500k.

The competition will close at midday GMT on 17 April 2020.

DASA will be holding a dial in briefing session and 1-1 slots to enable potential suppliers to ask questions:

26 March 2020 – A dial-in session providing further detail on the problem space and a chance to ask questions in an open forum. If you would like to participate, please register on the Dial in Eventbrite page.

26 March 2020 – A series of 20 minute one-to-one teleconference sessions, giving you the opportunity to ask specific questions. If you would like to participate, please register on the 1-1s Eventbrite page.

Additional date added

2 April 2020 – A series of 15 minute one-to-one teleconference sessions, giving you the opportunity to ask specific questions. If you would like to participate, please register on the 1-1s Eventbrite page.

Update 23 March 2021
We are pleased to announce that DASA is planning to launch Phase 2 of this competition in Mid April 2021.



        
      

      
    Published 5 March 2020
    Last updated 23 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 March 2021
              Announcing phase 2 plans
            
            
              5 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Funding for innovation in renewable energy
        Competition: Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence Phase 2

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Manufacturing
        Scientific research and development
        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    