

Teachers' use of student data to inform instruction is commonly accepted as sound educational practice, but studies reveal inconsistent data use and an overall lack of the preparation and skills needed to interpret and use student data. This American Educator Panels Data Note details teachers' access to and use of data systems.




Read Online

Educator Access to and Use of Data Systems
by Tiffany Berglund, Katie Tosh
Related Topics: Data Science, Educational Technology, Teacher Training, Workforce Development
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download Free Electronic Document

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.1 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

What kinds of data and supports did teachers have access to through the electronic data management system(s)?What kinds of support did teachers receive in using student data to guide decisions about instruction?How often did teachers use an electronic data management system for each of the following purposes?



Teachers' use of student data to inform instruction is commonly accepted as sound educational practice, and this data use is only likely to grow as more data, as well as more-complex data, become increasingly available to educators. However, numerous studies reveal inconsistent data use among teachers and an overall lack of the preparation and skills needed to interpret and use student data to inform instructional practice. To effectively use a variety of student data, including — but not limited to — assessment data, teachers must possess both assessment literacy (the ability to design, select, interpret and use assessment results appropriate for educational decisions) and data literacy (the ability to understand and use data to inform decisions). Research shows that teachers' sense of self-efficacy in interpreting and using data is linked to their actual use of data; professional development supports can help build this self-efficacy and increasing data use. Results from the RAND Corporation's web-based American Educator Panels survey provide insight into teachers' access to data and the supports they receive to use it.
Key Findings

Teachers receive support for data use, have limited access to advanced dataMost teachers had access to student attendance and grade data; many had access to standardized test scores by student and grade.
Fewer than half of teachers had access to students' cumulative records (e.g., disciplinary history, course enrollment) or to links between student assessment results and instructional resources tailored to student learning needs.
Eighty-three percent of teachers reported having received some type of support with using student data.
The three most commonly reported supports are principal encouragement for using data in instructional decisionmaking (64 percent), professional development on data-driven decisionmaking offered at a school (59 percent), and support from school/district data staff or a consultant skilled in data analysis (45 percent).


Recommendation

Investing in teacher data-use support could lead to increased data use in instructional practice.



 Related Products 









Project
The American Educator Panels

Jul 3, 2018










Report
How Much Influence Do Teachers Have in Their Schools?

Apr 7, 2020
William R. Johnston, Goke Akinniranye, et al.










Report
AEP Data Note Technical Appendix

Dec 13, 2018
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, William R. Johnston










Report
Are Educators Setting Goals for Social-Emotional Learning?

Apr 7, 2020
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, William R. Johnston, et al.










Report
School Reform Efforts: Here Today, Gone Tomorrow?

Apr 7, 2020
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, Goke Akinniranye










Report
School Improvement Plans

Apr 8, 2020
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, Goke Akinniranye, et al.










Report
Perceptions of School Leadership

Apr 9, 2020
Katie Tosh, Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss










Report
Time for Change?

Apr 9, 2020
Rachel Perera, Courtney Armstrong










Report
Students with Unique Learning Profiles

Apr 10, 2020
Tiffany Berglund, William R. Johnston










Report
Where Do Educators Turn to Address Instructional and Behavior Challenges?

Apr 15, 2020
Laura S. Hamilton, Gerald P. Hunter










Report
AEP Data Note Technical Appendix 2

Aug 15, 2019
William R. Johnston, Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss










Report
Are U.S. Teachers Using High-Quality Instructional Materials?

Apr 15, 2020
Julia H. Kaufman @juliahkaufman, Katie Tosh, et al.










Report
Learning from Peers on a Large Scale

Apr 15, 2020
Elizabeth D. Steiner @ED_Steiner, William R. Johnston










Report
Principals Could Use More Support to Help Students with Disabilities -- Especially in Schools Serving Mostly Students of Color

Dec 31, 2019
Laura Stelitano, William R. Johnston, et al.










Report
Writing Instruction in U.S. Classrooms

May 14, 2020
William R. Johnston










Report
Data Access and Use Among Middle and High School Principals

Jun 11, 2020
Laura S. Hamilton, William R. Johnston










Report
Teachers' Use of Intervention Programs

Mar 19, 2020
Laura Stelitano, Sy Doan, et al.










Report
Digital Instructional Materials

Apr 16, 2020
Katie Tosh, Sy Doan, et al.







Research conducted by

RAND Education and Labor



The research described in this report was conducted by RAND Education and Labor and supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. For this document, different permissions for re-use apply. Please refer to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation section on our permissions page.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 4
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR2575.8-1
Document Number: RR-2575/8-1-BMGF
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Data ScienceEducational TechnologyTeacher TrainingWorkforce Development

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Berglund, Tiffany and Katie Tosh, Educator Access to and Use of Data Systems. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2575z8-1.html.
Berglund, Tiffany and Katie Tosh, Educator Access to and Use of Data Systems, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2575/8-1-BMGF, 2020. As of December 16, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2575z8-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



