
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    NHS population screening: identifying and reducing inequalities
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance and resources to support providers and commissioners in reducing screening inequalities.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      22 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        23 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Screening provider responsibilities

        
        
          Inequalities strategy

        
        
          Guidance, resources and shared learning

        
        
          Identifying inequalities

        
        
          Reducing inequalities

        
        
          Reasonable adjustments

        
        
          Accessible information

        
        
          Programme-specific guidance

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

All eligible people should be able to access NHS population screening programmes and understand the potential benefits and harms of screening tests in ordered to make an informed choice. However, variation in participation exists both within and between national screening programmes.

Barriers can result in some people being unable to maximise the benefits of screening. And people at higher risk of the conditions being screened for are generally less likely to participate.

Health inequalities are avoidable and unfair differences in health status between groups of people or communities. They can occur at any of these points along the screening pathway:


  cohort identification (invitation)
  provision of information about screening
  access to screening services
  access to treatment and onward referral
  outcomes


Health inequalities exist across a range of dimensions or characteristics, including the 9 protected characteristics in the Equality Act 2010: socioeconomic position, occupation, geographic deprivation and membership of a vulnerable group.

These dimensions overlap, as shown in the illustration below adapted from the PHE Health Equity Assessment Tool.



Screening provider responsibilities

The NHS England Standard Contract Service Condition 13 (SC13) outlines the contractual requirements for equity of access to services, equality and the avoidance of discrimination.

Under the Equality Act 2010, the Health and Social Care Act 2012 and the Public Services (Social Value) Act 2013, NHS screening providers have a legal duty to make sure screening services are accessible to everyone, including people with one or more protected characteristic.

The responsibilities for all providers are set out in the inequalities section of the Population screening: pathway requirements supporting information.

Inequalities strategy

The national PHE Screening inequalities strategy, published in 2018, supports local screening services, commissioners and others involved in the provision of screening to address inequalities.

The strategy emphasises the importance of ensuring equitable access to screening services and supporting people to make an informed choice about participating in screening.

Guidance, resources and shared learning


Access national PHE guidance and resources to support local providers, commissioners and other partners in reducing screening inequalities.


These publications include guidance for health and social care professionals and easy read resources for people with learning disabilities.

PHE also shares learning on reducing screening inequalities in PHE Screening blog articles and via events such as the national screening inequalities conferences held in 2019 and 2021.

Identifying inequalities

The first stage in addressing screening inequalities at local or regional level is to identify the inequalities that exist within the screening pathway. This is essential to know where and how to target action, and to identify interventions to improve access to services and outcomes.

PHE sets standards and guidance to support the quality and performance of the NHS screening programmes. Local services can use screening data to identify inequalities in the pathway and where improvements are needed to reduce barriers and address variation.

Review at a local level of performance by population group may indicate inequity in participants entering and completing the screening pathway, or accessing services within optimal timescales.

Health equity audits (HEAs) examine how health determinants, access to relevant health services and related outcomes are distributed across the population.

Screening providers and commissioners should use the NHS population screening health equity audit (HEA) guide to help:


  identify groups less likely to participate in screening
  assess health inequalities related to screening services
  identify possible actions to help reduce inequalities


The screening HEA guide is designed to be used in conjunction with the wider PHE Health Equity Assessment Tool.

E-learning for the PHE HEAT is also available.

Local screening providers should have procedures in place to identify and support people who are considered vulnerable or underserved, including but not exclusive to:


  those who are not registered with a GP
  homeless people and rough sleepers
  asylum seekers
  gypsy and traveller groups
  those in prison
  those with mental health conditions
  those with drug or alcohol harm issues
  people with learning disabilities, physical disabilities or communication difficulties
  non-English speakers
  sex workers


Providers should comply with safeguarding policies and good practice recommendations for such people.

Providers should include appropriate cohorts of local armed forces personnel and their dependents who are registered with defence medical centres within their responsible population boundaries.

Providers should involve service users in the development and evaluation of services whenever possible. This should include representation from service users reflecting the local community, including those considered vulnerable or underserved.

Reducing inequalities

PHE has developed a range of cross-programme and programme-specific screening information and guidance to support providers, commissioners and other partners in reducing screening inequalities.

Cross-programme PHE screening inequalities guidance includes:


  guidance on the effective use of text message reminders
  Population screening: supporting people with learning disabilities
  guidance on improving access to screening for people with severe mental illness
  screening information for trans and non-binary people
  Population screening: reducing inequalities in secure settings
  NHS population screening: support for carers


Screening incidents can occur throughout the screening pathway. Providers should review and learn from incidents to identify actions required to improve services and reduce inequalities.

The NHS Equality and Health Inequalities Hub is designed to provide support to the NHS, and beyond, in promoting equality and tackling health inequalities for all patients, communities and the NHS workforce. It brings together equality and health inequalities resources and provides useful links and information for the sharing of good practice.

Inclusion health: applying All Our Health summarises the principles of inclusion health and social inclusion. It includes guidance for health professionals on action they can take to make sure socially excluded people can access and benefit from the services they need.

Health inequalities: reducing ethnic inequalities has guidance on action to reduce health inequalities related to ethnicity.

Local action on health inequalities: improving health literacy explains how health literacy contributes to health inequalities because population groups most at risk of low health literacy are also known to have the poorest health outcomes. It includes action local healthcare providers and other stakeholders can take to improve health literacy and reduce health inequalities.

Reasonable adjustments

Screening providers have a legal duty to make reasonable adjustments to make sure services are accessible to everyone, including people with disabilities.

Providers must follow the Accessible Information Standard by law. The standard aims to make sure people who have a disability, impairment or sensory loss are provided with information they can easily read or understand with support, so they can communicate effectively with health and social care services.

As part of the Accessible Information Standard, providers should:


  ask people if they have any information or communication needs, and find out how to meet those needs
  record those needs clearly and in a set way
  highlight or flag a person’s file or notes so it is clear they have information or communication needs and how these are met (see more information on the reasonable adjustment flag)
  share information about people’s information and communication needs with other providers of NHS and adult social care, when they have consent or as permitted by law
  take steps to ensure people receive information which they can access and understand, and communication support if they need it (PHE provides many information resources nationally to help meet this requirement)


Providers should use appropriate interpreter services for people who have specific communication needs, for example if English is not their first language or if they have a hearing impairment.

Accessible information

PHE has published national easy guide versions of screening information leaflets and screening appointment letter templates for people with learning disabilities, people with low levels of literacy and others who find easy read information helpful. Providers should use these national materials when inviting individuals for screening who have been identified as benefiting from information in an easy read format.

People with sight loss can access the digital web page versions of standard information leaflets on GOV.UK using screen reader technology. Providers can also advise people with sight, hearing, motor or cognitive impairments that they can adjust settings on mobile devices to make it easier to read digital publications. Step by step instructions are available on the AbilityNet website.

Providers should direct any individual requests for hard copy Braille versions of PHE Screening leaflets to the PHE screening helpdesk.

Programme-specific guidance

Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) screening

Read guidance for AAA screening providers, commissioners and other stakeholders on sharing learning and good practice in reducing barriers to attendance

Antenatal and newborn (ANNB) screening

Antenatal and newborn screening: identifying and reducing inequalities has guidance to support ANNB screening providers and commissioners in addressing inequalities throughout the screening pathway.

Bowel cancer screening

Bowel cancer screening: helping people with learning disabilities has information for health professionals to support eligible people with learning disabilities to access and understand bowel cancer screening.

Breast screening

Breast screening: identifying and reducing inequalities has guidance and shared practice for breast screening providers, commissioners and other stakeholders on addressing inequalities throughout the screening pathway.

Cervical screening

Cervical screening: supporting women with learning disabilities has information for health professionals to support eligible people with learning disabilities to access and understand cervical screening.

Cervical screening: support for people who find it hard to attend has guidance for people who find it hard to attend cervical screening due to having a mental health condition, or having experienced trauma or abuse.





      
        
    Published 22 March 2021
    Last updated 23 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 September 2021
              Added link to pathway requirements publication and a diagram of overlapping dimensions of health inequalities.
            
            
              23 September 2021
              Added link to Breast screening: identifying and reducing inequalities guidance.
            
            
              26 August 2021
              Added link to 'Antenatal and newborn screening: identifying and reducing inequalities' and 'Cervical screening: support for people who find it hard to attend'.
            
            
              22 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Antenatal and newborn screening: identifying and reducing inequalities
        Cervical screening: support for people who find it hard to attend
        NHS population screening: access for all
        Newborn hearing screening: programme overview
        Bowel cancer screening kit: how to use

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Population screening: evidence and guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    