

RAND Space Enterprise Initiative



The Space Enterprise Initiative is a new one-stop shop for space research and related activities across RAND.






Space Launch Complex 2 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California
Photo by Bill Ingalls/NASA
Focus Areas
The initiative builds on long-standing RAND relationships across the national and international space domains to marshal the broad perspectives necessary for optimizing the exercise of space power.

Space Policy and Strategy
The initiative offers U.S. space policy sponsors unmatched synergies by connecting the results of space policy research done for a wide spectrum of U.S. agencies, including the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Staff, the Intelligence Community, the Space Force, and USSPACECOM. RAND's research spans the work of these and other U.S. agencies. The initiative links, informs, and reinforces projects of mutual interest.
Space Operations
The initiative offers uniquely high value to sponsors seeking assistance with space operations, given the RAND operations research already being performed for U.S. military services and RAND's ability to spot the linkages between service operations and space operations, even when the topic of a service project is not directly related to space.
Space Capabilities and Resources
RAND's extensive engineering expertise drives capability and resource decisions across numerous U.S. and allied defense agencies. By serving as a hub for research on space capabilities and resources, with expertise emanating from all programs across RAND, the initiative offers sponsors greater insights than those that could be obtained by relying on any single research division.
Space Allies and Partners
Drawing on its international reach and experience, RAND provides valuable insights and recommendations to national security sponsors around the world. The RAND Space Enterprise Initiative provides an additional means for sponsors to collaborate with global allies and partners to create mutually beneficial relationships and opportunities in space.
Latest Space Publications




Launching into the Future: 75 Years of Excellence in Space Research at RAND November 23, 2021
RAND is proud to celebrate 75 years of excellence in space research and analysis. In this document, we spotlight a small number of reports to highlight the range of our contributions and celebrate our commitment to making a difference for decades to come.




Tailoring Deterrence for China in Space July 27, 2021
Krista Langeland, Derek GrossmanAs the United States has become increasingly reliant on space-based capabilities, protecting them has become vital to national security, especially in the face of China's ambitions for superiority in space. Considering the application of classical deterrence theory to the space domain, the authors show how and why China's own objectives should be considered in building a tailored deterrence strategy for China in space.




Responsible Space Behavior for the New Space Era: Preserving the Province of Humanity April 26, 2021
Bruce McClintock, Katie Feistel, Douglas C. Ligor, Kathryn O'ConnorThe past two decades have seen the start of a New Space Era characterized by more spacefaring nations and companies and a growing risk of collisions and conflict, yet the basic mechanisms for governing space activities have only marginally changed since their creation 50 years ago. The authors of this Perspective assess problem areas and barriers to progress and offer suggestions to improve space governance and responsible space behavior.



West Coast Aerospace Forum 2020: Aerospace Vision for the Future February 19, 2021
David Abba, Richard Danzig, David A. Deptula, Mackenzie Eaglen, Eric Fanning, Tim Grayson, Bob Hale, Todd Harrison, Edward R. Harshberger, Clinton Hinote, et al.The 6th annual West Coast Aerospace Forum in December 2020 featured discussions between some of the Department of the Air Force's most senior and experienced leaders and top civilian national security experts. The theme of this event was "An Aerospace Vision for the Future." Topics included the future shape of the world order, the U.S. defense budget outlook, the changing national security landscape, and the new National Defense Strategy.



RAND Space Launch Virtual Panel December 8, 2020
Bonnie L. Triezenberg, Yool Kim, Gary McLeod, D. Jason Cothern, Bruce McClintockA panel discussion hosted by the RAND Space Enterprise Initiative tackles issues related to the global space launch enterprise. The panel of RAND Corporation experts joined Brigadier General D. Jason Cothern to consider how U.S. Space Force decisions affect domestic launch providers, how recent trends affect future strategies and policies for responsive space launch, and the capabilities and limitations of U.S. space launch facilities.


See more space publications »


Contact
Write to space@rand.org with inquiries about RAND's space work, or to hear about upcoming events.

Leadership



Bruce McClintock
Lead, Space Enterprise Initiative


Bruce McClintock is lead of the RAND Space Enterprise Initiative and a senior policy researcher at the RAND Corporation. The RAND Space Enterprise Initiative is a virtual center that provides a focal point for all RAND space-related research for the U.S. government and U.S. allies. McClintock…


Research Clients
The Space Enterprise Initiative serves sponsors in RAND's traditional U.S. and international space sponsor base but especially those in the newly formed U.S. Space Force and U.S. Space Command (USSPACECOM).

U.S. Office of the Secretary of Defense
U.S. Space Force
U.S. Air Force
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
National Reconnaissance Office (NRO)
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA)
Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC)
Missile Defense Agency (MDA)
Space Security and Defense Program (SSDP)
Japan
Australia
United Kingdom
European Defence Agency




