
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Worker and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors: sponsor a Creative Worker
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for sponsors on sponsoring a Creative Worker.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Visas and Immigration

      
      Published
      9 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        11 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Worker and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors: sponsor a Creative Worker (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Worker and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors: sponsor a Creative Worker
    
        PDF, 355KB, 33 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Guidance for employers in the creative sector on how to sponsor a creative worker on the Creative Worker route.

This route allows creative workers who can make a unique contribution to the UK’s rich cultural life, and their entourage, to come to the UK for up to 12 months initially, with the option to extend their permission up to a maximum of 24 months (if continuing to work for the same sponsor).



        
      

      
    Published 9 December 2020
    Last updated 11 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 October 2021
              Updated to reflect the introduction of the new Temporary Work – Creative Worker route, to outline responsibilities for sponsors who will be sponsoring school-age children, and other minor amendments and clarifications.
            
            
              13 May 2021
              Added accessible version.
            
            
              6 April 2021
              Guidance updated to reflect the amended definition of "consecutive engagement" in the latest Statement of Changes to the Immigration Rules (HC 1248), and other minor amendments.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              Updated the guidance.
            
            
              9 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors: sponsor an International Sportsperson
        Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors: sponsor a Minister of Religion or religious worker
        Workers and Temporary Workers: guidance for sponsors: sponsor a Charity Worker
        Sponsor guidance appendix B: immigration offences and sponsorship
        Workers and Temporary Workers pre-licence error correction form

  




      

    Collection

  


        Sponsorship: guidance for employers and educators

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Entering and staying in the UK

  


  

  


    
  


    