
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Digital Transformation and Upskilling in the Coast to Capital LEP Area - OC04S19P1587
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project to address the digital needs of local businesses and their workforce. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      10 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        6 January 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      South East
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      2 January 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Details

As technology progresses and the business world becomes ever more reliant on digital processes and automation, it is important to ensure that our businesses, the people that lead them and that they employ are supported to explore and identify their digital strengths, weaknesses, challenges and opportunities and to develop a digital transformation plan.

We believe it is important to address the needs of a business and its workforce in a joined up way and it is for this reason that we have combined two Investment Priorities (IP 2.1 and 2.2) for this call. We envisage there being two interconnected strands to this project as set out in further detail in the Call specification. Strand 1 Digital Transformation of the Business (Supporting IP2.2) and Strand 2 Digital Skills Training for Workforce (Supporting IP2.1)

For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Coast to Capital LEP area.

Value

Approximately £2,099,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines
Full application deadline: 02 January 2020.

Completion date
Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.

The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details

If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 10 October 2019
    Last updated 6 January 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 January 2020
              Digital Transformation and Upskilling in the Coast to Capital LEP Area - OC04S19P1587 project call is now closed.
            
            
              10 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    