 – Today, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) announced up to $45 million for research to advance solar hardware and systems integration, including the creation of a consortium dedicated to developing control technologies for a modernized electric grid.While solar makes up three percent of U.S. electricity, that amount is expected to reach 18 percent by 2050—requiring an increase of hundreds of gigawatts of solar capacity. As a result, DOE’s Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) is seeking new solutions that can reliably bring large quantities of solar onto the grid and that can ensure that American-made hardware is used in those installations. “The Nation’s solar energy use is on the rise,” said Secretary of Energy Dan Brouillette, “investing in innovative research and development projects will help ensure that the technologies we’re using benefit the U.S. economy while securely delivering reliable power to all Americans.”EERE’s Solar Energy Technologies Office (SETO) Fiscal Year 2021  funding program will advance solar in two broad areas: systems integration and hardware incubator.Today’s grid uses power from multiple energy resources, and it has become digitized and complex. Connecting solar reliably and securely to the power grid—whether as utility-scale photovoltaic (PV) or as smaller-scale distributed PV systems for homes and businesses—is a challenge the two topic areas below are designed to meet. The new , which was developed in collaboration with three DOE National Laboratories and two universities, will help guide the research as these technologies advance. U.S. universities, companies, nonprofits, and State, local, and tribal governments are encouraged to apply under this topic. DOE seeks innovative projects in the following areas:In 2019, less than half of the $9 billion spent on PV hardware in the United States was spent on domestic hardware. U.S. solar hardware manufacturing creates jobs and economic activity and promotes energy security. This topic is designed to increase U.S. solar manufacturing by bringing innovative technologies to market more quickly. Only U.S. for-profit entities may apply under this topic. DOE seeks innovative projects in the following areas: to learn more about this funding opportunity at an upcoming webinar. Visit the  for more information. Learn more about EERE .###News Media Contact: (202) 586-4940 