
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Fibre in Water: Improving access to advanced broadband and mobile services via drinking water mains
  

  
  
  
      
  Fibre in Water (FiW) is an open competition, run by DCMS from HM Treasury’s Shared Outcomes Fund and supported by DEFRA, BEIS and Cabinet Office. It will allocate up to £4 million of R&D funding to projects that develop and build a pilot to facilitate delivery of advanced broadband and mobile services via drinking water mains.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      9 August 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Background

        
        
          Objectives of the pilot

        
        
          Competition timeline and events

        
        
          Who can apply?

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Funding

        
        
          Required documents

        
        
          Supporting documents

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

What is Fibre in Water?

Fibre in Water is an open competition, allocating up to £4 million of R&D funding to projects that develop and build a pilot or pilots to facilitate connecting the hardest to reach areas of the UK with advanced fixed and mobile telecoms services and reduce water leakage from potable water pipes. It will enable innovative technologies in the water industry and ‘future proof’ water and telecommunications infrastructure including de-risking the PSTN switch-off between 2021 and 2025.

Background

The Fibre in Water: Improving Access to Advanced Broadband and Mobile Services via Drinking Water Mains (FiW) project is to pilot and facilitate delivery of advanced broadband and mobile services via drinking water mains. This will help to align policy, regulation and commercial interests across five Government departments, multiple agencies as well as the private sector in the water and telecoms industries.

The project will look to test barriers in regulations, approvals and licensing at national, regional and local levels and reduce time, cost, disruption and carbon costs associated with delivering gigabit capable digital services and mobile coverage. The project will also look to demonstrate how this vital infrastructure (water and telecoms) can be delivered together, while delivering savings to customers. This will both support economic development in some of the UK’s hardest to reach communities, and simultaneously enable the modernisation of the water industry, including solving the challenge it faces from the removal of the copper public switched telephone network (PSTN) between 2021 and 2025.

The project will also enable the water industry to radically reduce the current 20% clean water leakage and resulting carbon emissions, passing on benefits to consumers through lower bills. This is part of a wider industry effort as well as Ofwat which has a 50% reduction target on leakage.

Deployment challenges for essential utilities like water and telecoms are complex, and are tightly regulated as both are key pillars of the UK’s Critical National Infrastructure (CNI). There are significant synergies between critical infrastructures that could be exploited if the deployment challenges can be overcome.

While some of the prior technical barriers to delivering FiW appear resolvable, barriers to adoption remain in regulation and coordination. Working collaboratively between departments, regulators and agencies as well as the two industries is essential for this project to succeed.

This competition aims to find a suitable consortium of partners to deliver feasibility studies and technical pilot(s), as well as represent the interests and challenges faced by their industries.

Objectives of the pilot


  
    Execute a Feasibility Study to de-risk and inform the detailed scope, costs and benefits of the pilot implementation. Sign-off of this study will form a gate for progression with the rest of the Pilot.
  
  
    Deploy a FiW pilot solution in the UK at sufficient scale to explore the technical, security, operational, regulatory and commercial challenges and benefits to all stakeholders and to give confidence that the solution could be scaled nationally.
  
  
    Support DCMS in building a community or ecosystem around the pilot that will ensure wide adoption of FiW, sharing key learning in the form of case study, technical reports and other project outputs.
  
  
    Collaborate with DCMS, DEFRA and their partners to inform and test regulatory, commercial, operational and cultural barriers to widespread adoption of FiW
  


Competition timeline and events

There will be opportunities to learn more about the competition and discuss with potential collaboration partners at a series of direct engagement events:


  
    
      Briefing Events
      Date
    
  
  
    
      Launch Event
      10th August
    
    
      Matchmaking Event
      10th August
    
  


For this competition the application window is open for 8 weeks and the timeline is:


  
    
      Milestones
      Date
    
  
  
    
      Competition launch
      9th August 2021
    
    
      Applications deadline (8 weeks)
      4th October 2021
    
    
      Shortlisted applicants notified
      Mid October 2021
    
    
      Interviews with shortlisted applicants
      Late October 2021
    
    
      Successful applicant notified
      November 2021
    
    
      Grant claim period
      January 2022 - 31 March 2024
    
  


Who can apply?

This competition is open to applications from consortia of two or more members with funding available for activity taking place in the UK.

How to apply

Please read the Competition Guidance, complete the Application Form, the Finance Forms and Participation Agreement provided and submit your documents to the following email address: 5genquiries@dcms.gov.uk. You will receive an email acknowledgement of your registration.

Funding

There is up to £4 million of funding available from the Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) in this competition. Grants up to £4 million will be made available to individual projects. DCMS may opt to award one or more grants from the fund.

Required documents


  
      
  
  
    Application form
    
        MS Word Document, 42.4KB
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Project finance form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 569KB
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Fibre in Water Competition: participation agreement
    
        MS Word Document, 125KB
    


  


Supporting documents


  
      
  
  
    Fibre in Water Competition: application guidance
    
        PDF, 747KB, 29 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Fibre in Water Competition: Draft grant funding agreement
    
        MS Word Document, 210KB
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Fibre in Water Competition: General guidance for grant applications
    
        PDF, 91.4KB, 9 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Fibre in Water Competition: Eligible project costs guidance
    
        PDF, 106KB, 7 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Fibre in Water Competition: Guidance for academics applying via the Je-S system
    
        PDF, 431KB, 3 pages
    


  


Contact us

If you have any questions or would like more clarification, please contact us on 5genquiries@dcms.gov.uk. Your question and respective answer will be aggregated, anonymised and added to a public Q&A document unless commercially sensitive.




      
        
    Published 9 August 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Digital Connectivity Infrastructure Accelerator (DCIA)
        Digital Connectivity Infrastructure Accelerator
        Background Information Documents for the DCIA Local Authorities Survey
        Government as Insurer of Last Resort
        Review of the Access to Infrastructure Regulations - call for evidence

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Communications and telecomms

  


  

  


    
  


    