Ten months into the coronavirus pandemic’s , public health experts are  over mounting infections and deaths signaling the country’s  of the pandemic to date. Recent statistics estimate the loss of one life every thirty secondsJan. 7 set the record for the deadliest  in our fight against the virus, topping four thousand deaths for the first time.Even as the are  across the country the pandemic will continue to rage in the coming months, which officials warn could mean a total of  before February. Meanwhile, the U.S. healthcare system is under unprecedented stress and the capacity of states to respond to and restrain the spread of the coronavirus is at a critical point in the country’s fight against this pandemic. A newly-discovered extra contagious variant of the virus recently  and has the potential to change most aspects of a U.S. response. In the coming weeks and months, as a new administration prepares to marshal resources and works to become fully operational in combating this virus, every day counts and technology may help to save lives in the lead up to Inauguration Day. In an all-hands-on-deck moment, it’s time to revisit the wildcard issue of digital contact tracing.During the initial surge of the pandemic, as life started to change across the globe, digital contact tracing was seen as somewhat of an untested tool to augment manual contact tracing efforts. , a vital part of the public health toolkit, is a method of contacting people known to be in close contact with infected individuals. As states considered digital options, many rightly had questions surrounding the effectiveness and security of a solution versus the investment and likelihood of adoption. Would people trust a government-developed app enough to use it regularly? Would a solution be accurate enough to be effective? Should states choose a location-tracking system (like using geolocational cell phone data) or a proximity-based one (using Bluetooth technology), and what investments would have to be made? These were only some of the questions for many dealing with significant unknowns, which remained all but unanswered in the absence of a national coordinating strategy. Even so, first adopters built an ecosystem to test the potential of digital contact tracing as part of their virus mitigation efforts. Google and Apple, in partnership with MIT PACT, developed a novel privacy-preserving yet complicated  system for states to adopt. Other states instead developed and rolled out their own contact tracing apps in partnership with small technology vendors.