
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pathways: Text Analysis
  

  
  
  
      
  Government Analysis Function Learning Pathways, highlighting a route through learning focusing on text analysis.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Analysis Function

      
      Published
      1 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Text Analysis

        
        
          Persona

        
        
          Summary

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Text Analysis


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Description

Text Analysis sits at the intersection of computing, linguistics and analytics to facilitate communication between computers and humans in “natural language” e.g., English. This pathway introduces the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) for handling natural language data using industry standard open-source tools. The pathway gives an in-depth understanding of standard machine learning techniques, and how these can be employed within text analysis to develop predictive language models for applications like text classification, sentiment analysis and topic modelling.

Learning Objectives


  Demonstrate a thorough understanding of natural language processing principles in a computational setup.
  Ingest, clean and pre-process text data using industry standard open-source tools and libraries.
  Understand and practice standard statistical machine learning approaches including decision trees, regression, classification and clustering.
  Apply statistical machine learning principles to natural language data for a variety of use cases.


Length

This pathway contains five courses.

Persona

To help decide if this is the pathway for you, this learning persona is designed to create a realistic representation of the intended learning audience.



General Background

Raj is a fraud analyst.

Starting Point

Raj handles a large amount of text data, he is an expert Excel user, however newer technologies that come under Artificial Intelligence are unfamiliar to him.

Perceived Needs

Raj is keen to learn how coding and new analytical tools like Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing can be used to make his job easier.

Special Considerations

Raj would feel comfortable with learners at the same level as him.

Summary

Textual data is overflowing from all fronts: social media outlets to blogs to emails. This learning journey explores key concepts in language models, and how to process text data to draw insights from textual data.


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Back to Analytical Learning Pathways page.




      
        
    Published 1 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pathways: Statistical Analysis
        Pathways: Managing Data
        Pathways: Data Visualisation
        Pathways: Analytical Awareness for Non-Analysts
        Pathways: Data Wrangling

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    