McKinsey’s recent publications,  and , highlighted employee mental health (including substance use) as a major concern for employers in light of COVID-19. Even as the pandemic’s end may be in sight, the workforce continues to struggle, with many perceiving gaps in support. Mental health will continue to be a key priority as employers plan for a return to the workplace.
        


    
    In this article, we use data from two national surveys that  ran in late 2020: one of 791 full-time employees and the other of 528 benefits decision makers. Our survey results indicate there is continued opportunity for employers to support workforce mental health by taking five actions: make mental wellness a priority, enhance available mental health support, communicate available mental health support, create an inclusive work culture, and measure and meet the need.Please note: Throughout this article, the term mental health is inclusive of substance use.
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
     Findings in this infographic are based on responses to the 2020 McKinsey Mental Health Employer Survey and the 2020 McKinsey Mental Health Consumer Survey, launched by McKinsey’s Center for Societal Benefit through Healthcare. The two surveys were fielded from November to December 2020. Employer respondents included 528 individuals who are primary or secondary decision makers for mental health benefits and related workplace programs. The survey sample was weighted to match the profile of employers at the national level using the number of employers in each employer size and industry type (based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)), and the number of employees in each employer size and industry type. Consumer (employee) respondents included a nationally representative subset of 1,523 individuals ages 18−84, including full- and part-time employees; adults not employed full-time were excluded from findings in this article. Of the 1,523 respondents, 791 were full-time employees. The sample was weighted to reflect national demographics. Both employer and employee samples were sourced separately, and employee responses were not tied to specific employers in the analysis.