
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    National design guide
  

  
  

  
    
  This guide illustrates how well-designed places that are beautiful, enduring and successful can be achieved in practice. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities  and Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government

      
      Published
      1 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        30 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    National design guide
    
        PDF, 10.4MB, 66 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@communities.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    National design guide (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The national design guide sets out the characteristics of well-designed places and demonstrates what good design means in practice.

It forms part of the government’s collection of planning practice guidance and should be read alongside the separate planning practice guidance on design process and tools.

See also the National Model Design Code and Guidance Notes for Design Codes.




        
      

      
    Published 1 October 2019
    Last updated 30 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 January 2021
              Amended to align with National Model Design Code and Guidance Notes for Design Codes, published separately.
            
            
              1 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        National Model Design Code
        National Model Design Code: testing programme - expressions of interest
        National Model Design Code: Phase 2 pilots - expression of interest
        Office for Place launch
        Planning guidance: letters to chief planning officers

  




      

    Collection

  


        Housing development support for local government projects

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Planning system

  


  

  


    
  


    