As the COVID-19 pandemic has swept across borders, immobilizing the United States and much of Europe, it has introduced profound stress and uncertainty into almost every area of the global economy. The fallout has had two primary consequences for financial markets that reference the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) as a benchmark, which were already undergoing a transition to alternative benchmarks at the end of next year. First, market volatility and the decoupling of LIBOR from alternative benchmarks have focused attention on the pricing of credit risk. Second, institutions have understandably shifted their resources to maintaining business continuity and mitigating market risk in the near term, raising questions about whether key LIBOR transition milestones will need to be adjusted. These transition uncertainties will need to be addressed with appropriate planning. To be successful in the months ahead, institutions should proactively assess and manage evolving transition timetables and execution risks, coordinate closely with clients and regulators, and continue preparing for critical bodies of contract remediation and operational work. As we discuss later in this article, there are six specific actions institutions can take in order to manage uncertainty around their transition away from LIBOR.The first area of uncertainty concerns the pricing of LIBOR relative to alternative benchmarks, particularly the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) recommended by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) as the primary alternative to USD LIBOR. US credit markets began to show signs of strain in mid-March as corporate and financial borrowers sought to tap funding markets to reinforce cash reserves—just as lenders began withdrawing from money-market funds that supply short-term credit. In this cash-crunch environment, LIBOR and SOFR were always expected to fix at different levels: LIBOR is an unsecured rate that incorporates the credit risk of lending between banks, while SOFR is a secured rate based on repurchase agreement transactions collateralized by risk-free US Treasury securities. But by March 16, the LIBOR-SOFR spread had dramatically widened. This occurred as the Federal Reserve slashed interest rates, increased liquidity support for overnight repurchase agreement markets to $500 billion, and announced a series of emergency credit and asset purchase programs. SOFR declined from 110 basis points to fix at just 26 basis points, while 3-month LIBOR continued to fix at around 90 basis points. The spread of roughly 65 basis points (from 26 to 90) had doubled by the following week as money-market investors returned to the repurchase agreement market, with excess liquidity propelling SOFR further downward (Exhibit). On March 27, SOFR reached a record low of only 1 basis point while LIBOR followed other unsecured rates further upward, increasing by 20 basis points.As of this writing, liquidity conditions in the short-term funding markets appear to be tempering. However, market volatility is likely here to stay, raising questions around the behavior of LIBOR in absolute terms and relative to secured rates like SOFR. Three observations, in particular, stand out:How these risks will unfold in the coming months remains unclear. But institutions should continue to closely watch and prepare for the potential impacts of volatility on transition execution. Without a clear-eyed view of how market risks could evolve, institutions potentially leave themselves exposed to unfavorable outcomes.A second area of uncertainty concerns the timing of key LIBOR transition milestones. Institutions are intensely focused on ensuring business continuity in the near term, raising questions about the feasibility of meeting the current LIBOR transition timetable. While the FCA has made clear that the ultimate transition target date of December 31, 2021 has not changed, they have been less assertive about key interim milestones landing in 2020 and 2021.Indeed, the market fallout from the COVID-19 crisis has already had an impact on several milestones. The US Federal Housing Finance Agency recently extended by three months its deadline for federal home loan banks to cease entering into LIBOR-linked instruments that mature after 2021. Similarly, multiple clearinghouses recently elected to defer the transition of discounting for Euro-cleared derivatives from EONIA to €STR from June to July 2020.There is speculation concerning further extensions. The United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates LIBOR, has suggested that several UK milestones may be pushed back— acknowledging that there has “been an impact on the timing of some aspects of the transition programs of many firms. Particularly in segments of the UK market that have made less progress in transition and are therefore still more reliant on LIBOR, such as the loan market, it is likely to affect some of the interim transition milestones.”Still, the FCA and the Financial Stability Board (a consortium of national and international regulators) have made clear that the ultimate timing of the LIBOR transition has not changed. At the end of 2021, LIBOR panel banks will not be compelled to continue making LIBOR submissions. In the FCA’s words, “[t]he central assumption that firms cannot rely on LIBOR being published after the end of 2021 has not changed and should remain the target date for all firms to meet.Given the current market uncertainty, it may be tempting for institutions to pause their LIBOR transition planning efforts until further clarity is obtained. This would be a mistake. The transition will continue to move forward, and institutions that remain focused on mitigating transition risks, proactively engaging clients and regulators, and preparing for major bodies of contract remediation and operational work will set themselves up for success. Toward that end, we propose six actions institutions can take in order to manage transition uncertainty. The ARRC is a group of private-market participants convened jointly by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Eurex Clearing Circular No. 032/2020, www.eurexclearing.com; CME Group Advisory Notice No. 20-168, www.cmegroup.com. In the Euro area, the Working Group on Euro Risk-Free Rates (a group of private-market participants organized by the European Central Bank) has recommended the Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) as the primary alternative to the Euro Overnight Index Average (EONIA) legacy benchmark. Financial Conduct Authority, “Impact of the coronavirus on firms’ LIBOR transition plans,” March 25, 2020, www.fca.org.uk Financial Conduct Authority, “Impact of the coronavirus on firms’ LIBOR transition plans,” March 25, 2020, www.fca.org.uk