 The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) announced today $12 million in funding to 13 American Indian and Alaska Native communities across the nation for projects that will reduce energy costs and increase energy security and resiliency. The selected projects will power their homes and communities, make their buildings more energy efficient, and install microgrids for essential services and resiliency – critical elements to reaching the Biden Administration’s goal of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050.   “The Department of Energy is committed to working with American Indian and Alaska Native communities to strengthen energy infrastructure on Tribal lands,” said Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm. “These selections, the first from the Office of Indian Energy this year, underscore the Biden Administration's commitment to ensuring that communities disproportionately affected by climate change directly benefit from clean energy investments." Since 2010, DOE’s Office of Indian Energy has invested  across the contiguous 48 states and Alaska, valued at over $180 million . Through these grants, the Office of Indian Energy continues its efforts, in partnership with Native communities, to maximize the deployment of clean energy solutions for the benefit of American Indians and Alaska Natives.  Collectively, the selected projects are estimated to result in nearly 3.5 megawatts of clean energy generation and over 3.5 megawatt-hours of battery storage, serving over 1,300 tribal buildings and saving those communities a combined $1.8 million annually. The awardees are: “Too often, Tribes in our state have been without critical support needed to withstand crises like natural disasters or power outages. It’s good to see the Quinault Indian Nation receive important funds to support ongoing resiliency measures against emergencies that could put families at risk. As a partner and voice for all Washington state Tribes in the Senate, I’m going to keep fighting to ensure our state’s Tribes get the resources they need to build energy security and more resilient communities in the face of climate change,” said . “DOE’s partnership with Ute Mountain Ute and other tribal communities is vital to bolster energy resilience, reduce emissions, and address the climate crisis. This funding is critical for Ute Mountain Ute Tribe’s clean energy development and prosperity and will reduce their energy costs over time,” said . “We know that Tribal energy projects not only benefit our environment, but they also help improve community resiliency and foster economic development in Indian Country. That is why I’m glad to see this Department of Energy grant award going to three tribes in California. This funding will assist tribes in maximizing their clean energy potential while building Tribal capacity and creating jobs, combatting the climate crisis, and saving Tribal communities money on their energy bills. As we move forward with discussions about improving our infrastructure and building a clean energy economy for all, I’ll continue working in the Senate to make sure Tribal communities across California are not left behind,” said"I am very pleased to see these investments in our Alaska Native communities by the Department of Energy. Alaska is unique; our often unforgiving terrain and environment present many challenges for our remote villages. Energy is a critical need, and serves as the basis for economic opportunity and prosperity. Our Native communities should be entrusted to develop their own lands and resources. This funding will go a long way toward increasing energy efficiency, harnessing natural resources, reducing long-term energy costs, and improving air quality. I sincerely congratulate Alaska's grant recipients and look forward to seeing how the implementation of this funding will move their communities forward,” said    “Tapping underused energy resources and stabilizing energy costs, while also confronting climate change, are exactly what our South Florida communities need. I’m proud that the Seminole Tribe will be on the leading-edge of this vital solar mission in the Sunshine State,” said . “Climate change has shown us over and over that our infrastructure is no longer up to the task of providing power to many communities. With extreme heat, raging wildfires, and an increasing strain on our energy grid, it’s time we reimagine what our infrastructure looks like so it can meet the needs of the 21st Century. This project will make sure the Dry Creek Rancheria Tribe has the power they need in a cleaner, safer, and more cost effective way, and it will serve as a new playbook for communities all around the U.S. to follow,” said .   more about these projects. To learn about DOE's recent investments in tribal communities, visit the Office of Indian Energy's . 