
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    AI, Data Science and Machine Learning: a Dstl biscuit book
  

  
  

  
    
  A short guide to artificial intelligence (AI), data science and machine learning, explaining the terminology and helping you use and apply the latest advances. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      23 July 2019
      Last updated
      
        23 October 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Artificial Intelligence, Data Science and (mainly) Machine Learning: the Dstl Biscuit Book
    
        PDF, 3.54MB, 40 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email centralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This biscuit book has been published by data science experts at the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) AI Lab, to help the people we work (in MOD and beyond) understand how to engage with and use these technologies.

While it covers AI and data science, this book mainly focuses on machine learning. It is the first in a series of biscuit books issued by Dstl.

Explaining the definitions and differences, latest thinking and developments, biscuit books are something to be dipped into and easily digested - just like a biscuit with tea. Dstl is at the heart of innovations in this area, working with other government departments, academia and institutions for the defence and security of the UK.

For more information contact ai_lab@dstl.gov.uk



        
      

      
    Published 23 July 2019
    Last updated 23 October 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 October 2020
              Addition document added
            
            
              4 December 2019
              Updated Biscuit Book added
            
            
              23 July 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
        Building Blocks for AI and Autonomy: a Dstl biscuit book
        Assurance of AI and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
        Machine learning with limited data
        Dstl biscuit books

  




      

    Collection

  


        Dstl biscuit books

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    