Army Lt. Gen. Scott D. Berrier, deputy chief of staff of the Army for intelligence, provides keynote remarks at 7 a.m. EDT at the Association of the U.S. Army Breakfast Series, 2425 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, Virginia.
 
Air Force Lt. Gen. David D. Thompson, vice commander, U.S. Space Force, provides keynote remarks at 9 a.m. EDT; and Space Development Agency Director Derek Tournear participates in a panel at 9:30 a.m. EDT, at the Satellite 2020 Conference, Walter E. Washington Convention Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
 
Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas B. Modly, Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Michael M. Gilday, and Marine Corps Commandant Gen. David H. Berger provide testimony at 10 a.m. EDT on the fiscal 2021 funding request and budget justification for the Navy and Marine Corps to the Senate Appropriations Defense Subcommittee, Room 138, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia.
 
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security Kenneth P. Rapuano; Navy Adm. Craig S. Faller, commander, U.S. Southern Command; and Air Force Gen. Terrence J. O'Shaughnessy, commander, U.S. Northern Command, provide testimony at 10 a.m. EDT to the House Armed Services Committee on national security challenges and U.S. military activity in North and South America, 2118 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia. The hearing will also be .
 
Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition James F. Geurts; and Marine Corps Lt. Gen. Eric M. Smith, commanding general, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, and deputy commandant for combat development and integration, provide testimony at 10 a.m. EDT on Marine Corps ground modernization to the Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower, Room SR-222, Russell Senate Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia.
 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for African Affairs Pete Marocco speaks at 10:30 a.m. EDT; and Air Force Maj. Gen. Christopher E. Craige, director of strategy, engagement and programs, U.S. Africa Command, provides keynote remarks at 12:15 p.m. EDT, at Africa Symposium 2020: Advancing Africa's Governance, Peace, and Security, at the National Press Club, 529 14th St. NW, Washington, District of Columbia.
 
Deputy Chief Information Officer for Information Enterprise Peter Ranks discusses Department of Defense digital modernization strategy at 11:55 a.m. EDT at IT Modernization Summit 2020, The Conrad, 950 New York Ave. NW, Washington, District of Columbia.
 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Environment Maureen Sullivan provides testimony at 1:30 p.m. EDT on the impact of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) exposure on service members to the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies, 2359 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia. The hearing will also be .
 
Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Michael D. Griffin; Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology Bruce D. Jette; Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development & Acquisition James F. Geurts; and Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics William Roper provide testimony at 2 p.m. EDT on fiscal 2021 Department of Defense science and technology strategy, policy and programs to the House Armed Services Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and Capabilities, 2212 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia. The hearing will also be .
 
Navy Adm. Craig S. Faller, commander, U.S. Southern Command, briefs the media at 2:30 p.m. EDT in the Pentagon Briefing Room (2D972). Both U.S. and foreign journalists without a Pentagon building pass must be pre-registered in the Pentagon Visitor Management System to attend this briefing; plan on being escorted from the River Entrance Pedestrian Bridge or the Pentagon Metro Entrance Facility only. Please arrive no later than 45 minutes before the briefing; have proof of affiliation and photo identification. Please call 703-697-5131 for any questions and escort into the building. The briefing will also be .
 
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs Thomas P. McCaffery, Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs Virginia S. Penrod, Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness Thomas A. Constable, and Office of Force Resiliency Executive Director Elizabeth P. Van Winkle provide testimony as Panel 1 at 2:30 p.m. EDT to the Senate Armed Services Personnel Subcommittee on Department of Defense personnel programs, Room SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia. Panel 2 will follow with Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs E. Casey Wardynski; Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Manpower and Reserve Affairs Gregory J. Slavonic; John A. Fedrigo, performing the duties of assistant secretary of the Air Force for manpower and reserve affairs; Army Lt. Gen. Thomas C. Seamands, deputy chief of staff for personnel, G-1; Navy Vice Adm. John B. Nowell Jr., deputy chief of naval operations for manpower, personnel, training, and education, N-1; Air Force Lt. Gen. Brian T. Kelly, deputy chief of staff for manpower, personnel and services; and Marine Corps Lt. Gen. Michael A. Rocco, deputy commandant for manpower and reserve affairs. The hearing will also be .
 
Army Gen. Stephen R. Lyons, commander, U.S. Transportation Command; Navy Vice Adm. Ricky L. Williamson, deputy chief of naval operations, fleet readiness and logistics, N4; and Air Force Lt. Gen. David S. Nahom, deputy chief of staff for plans and programs, provide testimony at 2:30 p.m. EDT on sealift and mobility requirements in support of the National Defense Strategy to the House Armed Services Subcommittees on Seapower and Projection Forces, and Readiness, 2118 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia. The hearing will also be .
 
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works R.D. James; and Army Lt. Gen. Todd Semonite, chief of engineers and commanding general of the Army Corps of Engineers, provide testimony at 2:30 p.m. EDT to the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development on the fiscal 2021 funding request and budget justification for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation, Room 138, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, District of Columbia.