
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Powering Future Operations: Net Zero Challenges and Opportunities
  

  
  

  
    
  This paper provides an analysis of the energy and power needs across the defence Commands and offers recommendations for Defence Science and Technology. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      10 March 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Powering Future Operations: Net Zero Challenges and Opportunities
    
        PDF, 3.74MB, 23 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ddc-modinternet@mod.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Research Technology and Innovation Group of the Defence Suppliers Forum have set out a view of the challenges and opportunities for future energy and power provision and use for deployed Defence systems, in the wider context of the UK Governments Net Zero 2050 target.

Defence accounts for approximately 1% of the UK’s total greenhouse gas emissions, with carbon emissions from defence capability (vehicles, platforms and associated logistics) accounting for the majority of annual defence CO2e emissions.

The accompanying paper provides an analysis of the energy and power needs across the different Commands and offers a number of recommendations for Defence Science and Technology, which are currently being considered for inclusion in, and development of, forward plans.

Related information


  Defence Science and Technology
  
Defence Suppliers Forum.




        
      

      
    Published 10 March 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military recruitment, training and operations

  


  

  


    
  


    