
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Onley Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Onley Prison is a men’s prison in Rugby, Warwickshire.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      18 December 2019
      Last updated
      
        28 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Onley

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Onley

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Onley Prison

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Onley Prison

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minute survey.


Book and plan your visit to Onley


Onley prison is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 1 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


All visitors to HMP Onley must bring photo I.D and all adults over the age of 18 must bring proof of address when they visit.

To visit someone in Onley you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


You can book the day before provided there is space.
At least one visitor must be 18 or older at every visit.

Contact Onley if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Onley
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits

Onley is running a limited visits schedule. Visits are also happening differently than normal, observing strict guidelines, which must be followed.

You can book your visit by telephone. There is no online booking service available.

You can book by emailing: socialvisits.onley@justice.gov.uk

You can also book by telephone.

Booking line: 01788 523 402

The booking line is open Monday to Friday, 10am to 12:45pm and 1:15pm to 4pm

Find out about call charges

Visiting times:


  Monday: 2pm to 3:30pm
  Tuesday: no visits
  Wednesday: 2pm to 3:30pm
  Thursday: 2pm to 3:30pm
  Friday: 2pm to 3:30pm
  Saturday: 2pm to 3:30pm
  Sunday: 2pm to 3:30pm


How to book legal and professional visits

You can book your visit by telephone. There is no online booking service available.

Booking line:01788 523 402

The booking line is open Monday to Friday, 10am to 12:45pm and 1:15pm to 4pm

Visiting Times:
*Monday: 2pm to 3pm
*Tuesday: no visits
*Wednesday: 2pm to 3pm
*Thursday: 2pm to 3pm
*Friday: 2pm to 3pm

Getting to Onley
Find Onley Prison on a map

The sat nav postcode is CV23 8SZ.

There is car parking at the prison, including Blue Badge spaces for visitors with disabilities and some parent and child spaces.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  
    use National Rail Enquiries. The closest train station is Rugby. There is no bus service from the station. Taxis take about 20 minutes.
  
  
    use Traveline
  


Entering Onley Prison
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors (including children) will need to be given a pat-down search. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Onley Prison has a strict dress code policy, which means visitors should wear smart clothes (no vests, no low-cut tops, no shorts, no short dresses and no headwear, other than that worn for religious reasons).

Currently there will be no refreshments available during the visit.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Onley Prison. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker or in your car. This includes pushchairs and car seats. Only one key is allowed into prison, either a car key or a locker key.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There will be no refreshments available during the current time. The children’s play area will also not be avilable to use.

Family days
There are currently no family days being run.

Keep in touch with someone at Onley
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Onley.

Phone calls
Prisoners do not have phones in their rooms so they will always have to call you. To do this, they have to buy phone credits and use Pin phones on the wings when they are out of their rooms.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.
Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and to help keep people safe.

Email
You can send emails to someone in Onley using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies from the prisoner.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Letters
You can write at any time. 
Include the person’s name and prison number on the envelope. 
If you do not know their prison number, contact Onley.
All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts
You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
People in Onley are given a list of approved items that can be sent to them as gifts. Contact Onley Prison for more information on what’s allowed.

You can send in clothing parcels if the prisoner has reached and been on ‘enhanced’ status for six months.

Family and friends of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.
 
For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Make sure to include the person’s name and prison number on the parcel.

All parcels will be opened and checked by officers.

Life at Onley Prison
Onley Prison is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men can learn new skills to help them on release.
There are also opportunities for prisoners to recover from drug and alcohol addiction.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Onley has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by Warwickshire Safeguarding Adults Board.

Men can also get support from ‘peer supporters’ and ‘listeners’. These are other prisoners who help those at risk of self-harm.

Arrival and first night
When a prisoner first arrives at Onley Prison, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs. They will have the opportunity to speak to a support worker.

Induction
Each man who arrives at Onley Prison gets an induction that lasts about five days. They get an induction booklet and will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Around 700 men live at Onley.
There are 11 wings, each with a mixture of single and double rooms.
On different wings are a care and separation unit, a resettlement unit, a first-night unit and two substance misuse recovering units.

Education and work
Prisoners are offered either full-time or part-time education which meets the needs of both the National Curriculum and the national speculations for numeracy, literacy and information technology (IT).

The Shannon Trust trains prisoners who can read to help others improve their reading.

There’s a library with books, magazines, newspapers, multimedia computers and reprographics facilities that is open every day, except Monday.

It opens 4 evenings a week and learning support is offered then.

Training is in catering, fork-lift truck driving, gardening, contract work, kitchen work, industrial cleaning and recycling.

Onley has a Halfords Academy (bicycles), a Halfords Auto Centre (cars) and contact centre which all have the potential to offer employment on release.

Functional skills, key skills and language support is offered to all prisoners.
Particular support is offered to prisoners who finish their NVQ portfolios and other qualifications.
Distance Learning/Open University is available to all prisoners if they wish to extend their
learning further.

Onley has a multi-faith chaplaincy team that provides corporate worship, faith-based
teaching and pastoral care. Each new prisoner is seen by chaplaincy on arrival and
extra support can be given at difficult times. The prison fellowship work in partnership with chaplaincy delivering eight Sycamore Tree courses each year. The courses address victim awareness and
principles of restorative justice.

There are several offending behaviour programmes and interventions offered at Onley.

Temporary release
Men at this prison can not get release on temporary licence (RoTL).

Organisations Onley works with
Onley healthcare services (including dental and optical) are open 7 days a week provided by the Northamptonshire Healthcare Foundation Trust. They include a primary care team, a mental health team and an integrated drug treatment service.

Onley also provides a range of drug and alcohol support services in partnership with the  Northamptonshire Healthcare Foundation Trust and Phoenix Futures.
Phoenix Futures also gives men access to Alcoholics Anonymous and to a peers’ supporter scheme.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Support at Onley
A family support worker helps to find useful services for family and friends. For more information, you can contact Phoenix Futures.

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Onley. 
If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Onley Prison in response to independent inspections.

Contact Onley Prison
Governor: Matthew Tilt

Telephone (24 hours): 01788 523 400
Fax: 01788 523 401
Find out about call charges

Email: correspondenceonley@justice.gov.uk

Follow Onley on Twitter

Address


HMP Onley
Rugby
Warwickshire
CV23 8AP



See map

Safer custody hotline
If you are concerned for the welfare of a prisoner at Onley with regard to self-harm or violence, call the At Risk phone line.

Telephone: 01788 523 663
Lines open: 24 hours a day, 7 days a week

If you have any non-urgent safer custody queries about a prisoner at Onley, you can call safer custody hotline.

Telephone: 01788 523500
Lines open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week – you can leave a message and it will be dealt with promptly.


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minute survey.





      
        
    Published 18 December 2019
    Last updated 28 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 July 2021
              Added link to information about testing for physical contact at visits.
            
            
              21 May 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              30 April 2021
              Prison moved into National Stage 3 framework and is now preparing to open visits for family, friends and significant others. We will update this page with specific visiting information as soon as possible.
            
            
              26 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated prison info
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated prison info
            
            
              6 November 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new national restrictions in England.
            
            
              24 August 2020
              Updated ID requirements for families and friends visiting the prison.
            
            
              24 July 2020
              Added confirmation of secure video calls being made available at this prison.
            
            
              23 July 2020
              Updated: HMP Onley visiting times and visiting procedure changes during coronavirus.
            
            
              5 May 2020
              updated survey link
            
            
              1 April 2020
              Updated safer custody contact information.
            
            
              25 March 2020
              Prison visits update.
            
            
              18 December 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Kirklevington Grange Prison
        Coldingley Prison
        Whitemoor prison
        Kirkham Prison
        Cookham Wood Young Offender Institution

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    