
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Deterrence and Assurance Academic Alliance (DAAA)
  

  
  
  
      
  A community of interest for academic institutions to partner with Dstl on deterrence and related topics such as assurance, coercion and conflict escalation.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      13 February 2019
      Last updated
      
        16 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          
DAAA objectives

        
        
          Context

        
        
          
DAAA activities

        
        
          Future events

        
        
          Reading list

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The UK Deterrence and Assurance Academic Alliance (DAAA) aims to stimulate new thinking, and reinvigorate UK expertise, on deterrence and related topics such as assurance, coercion and conflict escalation. Our intent is to build a community of interest, made up of academic institutions in partnership with Dstl, that will conduct new research on these topics in order to reinvigorate this important subject.

The Alliance provides opportunities for UK universities to host events, ranging from small seminars to large conferences, that will bring together subject matter experts, young professionals, students, government policy and strategy leads, military personnel, and other stakeholders from UK and overseas. The aim is to refresh our understanding of deterrence and assurance, and reconstitute UK national expertise on the subject.


DAAA objectives

Our objectives are:


  Development of a community of interest
  Leveraging of existing expertise and research on these topics
  Encouragement of the development of deterrence professionals


Context

The 2015 Strategic Defence and Security Review highlighted that one of the UK government’s priorities is to deter state-based threats.  In addition, National Security Objective 1 is defined as ‘Protect our People’, stating that the UK will ‘deter potential adversaries, including through renewal of our nuclear deterrent’.


DAAA activities

Bringing together those with an interest in deterrence and assurance is at the heart of DAAA activity.  It is our intent to run 2 workshops each academic year and conduct an annual conference (preferably at academic institutions).  We are also keen to partner with, participate in and promote other relevant events at UK universities.  Please let us know about events that you may be running that would be of interest to DAAA members. Details of future events will appear here.

Future events


UK Deterrence and Assurance Academic Alliance Conference: 31 May and 1 June 2022

We’re partnering with the Defence Nuclear Organisation and King’s College London to hold our next conference at the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) in London.

The event has been postponed from January to enable us to hold an in-person conference.

About this event

The focus will be the challenges and implications of the changing deterrence and escalation landscape in an era of systemic competition.

The 2021 UK Integrated Review reiterated the importance of the UK’s nuclear deterrent against the full range of state nuclear threats. This is in a context where some states are significantly increasing and diversifying their nuclear arsenals, investing in novel technologies and developing new ‘warfighting’ nuclear systems, which they are integrating into their military strategies and doctrines as well as into their political rhetoric to seek to coerce others. The Review also identified that the increase in global competition, challenges to the international order and proliferation of potentially disruptive technologies all pose a threat to strategic stability.

The DAAA seeks diversity of opinions in submissions and speakers.  The conference will be run in an inclusive manner with a culture that encourages constructive challenge and we have encouraged submissions from experts at any stage of their career.

Reading list

For further information on deterrence and assurance, both in theory and in practice, alliance members have drafted a reading list to provide an illustration of academic and military understandings of the concepts. This reading list can be found here: Deterrence and Assurance Academic Alliance Reading List (PDF, 206 KB, 4 pages)

Contact us

UK DAAA: DSTLDAAA@dstl.gov.uk

U.S. Strategic Command USSTRATCOM runs a parallel DAAA activity in the U.S. and we regularly partner in activities such as running the 2021 U.S. Strategic Command Academic Alliance conference and workshop.







      
        
    Published 13 February 2019
    Last updated 16 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 December 2021
              The next DAAA conference has been postponed from January to May 2022.
            
            
              17 November 2021
              New dates announced for the DAAA conference: 11 and 12 January 2022.
            
            
              26 October 2021
              Added information about the postponement of the DAAA conference to early 2022.
            
            
              4 October 2021
              Deadline for submitting paper proposals for 2021 DAAA conference has been extended to 14 October 2021.
            
            
              19 August 2021
              Added details of 2021 UK DAAA Conference including call for papers and case studies.
            
            
              10 December 2020
              Added details of new U.S. Strategic Command Academic Alliance Conference and Workshop 2021.
            
            
              17 September 2020
              Events section  and reading list attachment updated
            
            
              10 September 2020
              A new section including an attachment "Reading list"
            
            
              13 February 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Growing the contribution of defence to UK prosperity: a report for the Secretary of State for Defence by Philip Dunne MP
        The 2021 Integrated Review: nuclear frequently asked questions
        UK National Shipbuilding Strategy: an independent report
        Defence personnel NHS commissioning bi-annual statistics: financial year 2017/18
        Lord Mayor's Banquet 2019: Foreign Secretary's speech

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces

  


  

  


    
  


    