
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing in adult care homes
  

  
  

  
    
  How to access test kits and step-by-step guides on how to use PCR and rapid lateral flow test kits for regular and outbreak testing of residents, staff and visiting professionals.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department of Health and Social Care

      
      Published
      24 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        29 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England

                Publication for Wales
          Publication for Scotland
          Publication for Northern Ireland

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Care home COVID-19 testing guidance for regular and outbreak testing of staff and residents
    
        PDF, 1.54MB, 43 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    COVID-19 testing schedule for a suspected or confirmed outbreak in a care home
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    COVID-19 testing schedule for a suspected or confirmed outbreak in a care home
    
        PDF, 179KB, 1 page
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Testing for professionals visiting care homes
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Regular and outbreak COVID-19 testing is available to all adult care homes.

All Care Quality Commission (CQC) registered care homes can apply for regular COVID-19 testing from NHS Test and Trace. If a care home has an outbreak and does not have enough stock to last until their next routine order, place an additional order by calling 119.

Care homes use both rapid lateral flow test and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests. Using both combines the rapid results of lateral flow testing with the higher sensitivity of PCR tests. Lateral flow tests will quickly identify some individuals who are highly infectious, enabling swift action to minimise spread of the virus, while the PCR test will identify those with a lower viral load, when the results are received.

New care home residents receive a PCR test when moving from hospital or from the community into a care home. We have published a service model for care homes testing individuals moving  into a care home.

Testing is also available for care home visitors (when indoor close contact visits are permitted as per national policy). See further guidance on visiting arrangements in care homes.


See the coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care (ASC) settings page for:


  on-site testing for adult social care services: rapid lateral flow test guide
  step-by-step guide for ASC staff to self-test using rapid lateral flow tests
  rapid lateral flow testing in ASC settings: an overview
  coronavirus (COVID-19) testing: terms and conditions
  coronavirus (COVID-19) self-test for staff, service users and visitors in adult social care settings: privacy notice



Sign up for regular adult care home testing webinars that cover the latest information on testing in care homes and explain the testing process. Local authority and care home staff are welcome.

This guidance should be read with:


  evidence summary for rapid lateral flow test devices in relation to care homes
  policy on visiting arrangements in care homes



Additional devolved administration links

Guidance on rapid lateral flow testing for care home visitors and staff in Scotland

Further guidance for nursing and residential care homes in Northern Ireland




        
      

      
    Published 24 March 2021
    Last updated 29 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 September 2021
              Changes to policy when there is one case of COVID-19 in a care home. Change to LFT testing frequency. Change to policy when there are 2 or more cases of COVID-19 in a care home. Change to ending outbreak restrictions, when they can be lifted and ongoing testing after this period.
            
            
              27 August 2021
              Updated 'Care home COVID-19 testing guidance for regular and outbreak testing of staff and residents' to reflect changes to self-isolation guidance that came into effect on 16 August 2021.
            
            
              7 July 2021
              Updated 'Care home COVID-19 testing guidance for regular and outbreak testing of staff and residents' and 'COVID-19 testing schedule for a suspected or confirmed outbreak in a care home' to reflect that policy for responding to the Delta variant (first identified in India) in care homes has now changed. As has been the case for the Alpha variant (first identified in Kent) cases since May 2021, for outbreaks involving the Delta variant, end of outbreak testing can now be undertaken 14 days (previously 28) after the most recent positive case. All positive cases should be treated as the Delta variant, unless proven otherwise.
            
            
              29 June 2021
              Updated 'Care home COVID-19 testing guidance for regular and outbreak testing of staff and residents' to reflect Scotland moving to 119.
            
            
              20 May 2021
              Updated to reflect changes to end of outbreak testing and updated instructions on using the multiple upload spreadsheet, which can now be used to report both rapid lateral flow tests and PCR tests.
            
            
              22 April 2021
              Added link to the 'Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care settings' page and 'Testing for professionals visiting care homes' guidance.
            
            
              24 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care settings
        Visiting arrangements in care homes
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for homecare workers
        Coronavirus (COVID-19): admission and care of people in care homes
        Organisation testing registration: record of users

  




      

    Collection

  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): adult social care guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Testing for coronavirus (COVID-19)

  


  

  


    
  


    