
        
        
        
     11 gubernatorial elections, and multiple state and local elections are scheduled for this November in the United States. That means, in the coming months, the United States faces the prospect of transfers of power across all levels of government amid multiple crises: the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (which may potentially worsen during the impending flu season); an economy in recession; protests and a large-scale social-justice movement; and the compounding effects of climate change. Further, as the US gears up for elections, Americans’ public trust in government remains at near-record lows.



    
    
        
 and complex undertaking in the best of times. When a new administration assumes power, be it in a state capital or city hall, it must confront—as a former US governor


 once said—the challenge of translating the poetry of its campaign into the prose of governance. New leaders must fill positions and master processes while events unfold without regard for the boldness of a leader’s vision or the determination to enact it.
Transfers of power in times of crises are all the more precarious because governments are in heightened reaction mode. And decisions made during a crisis invariably reshape economies and societies for years to come. Governments control huge swaths of the economy—the US government’s share of GDP is nearly 40 percent


—thus making their actions enormously consequential. The US federal fiscal response to the COVID-19 pandemic to date—$4 trillion—has exceeded the cost of the two-decade war in Afghanistan.



Unlike private-sector CEO transitions, government transitions involve not only new leaders but also simultaneous changes in direct reports and deputies. In general, private-sector transitions can have flexible schedules and timing, allowing for smoother execution and less potential disruption than government transitions. In contrast, the timing of government transitions is legally fixed and must occur no matter the situational realities. Moreover, private-sector transitions can involve a period of shared power (or an outgoing CEO’s transition to the chairperson role), while governments lack this level of flexibility. Furthermore, unlike CEO transitions, government transitions may follow hotly contested elections where the outgoing and incoming leaders are in opposition to one another. And even same-party transitions can create notable contrasts between administrations.During crises, close collaboration between incoming and outgoing administrations will likely minimize harms. During the global financial crisis of 2007–08, the outgoing Bush and incoming Obama administrations consulted each other openly and extensively on major decisions, including those that could not wait until inauguration.


 The Obama administration also kept several key Bush administration officials in their roles as an important form of continuity.



    
Governmental transitions may vary in degrees of regularity and seamlessness, and newly elected officials and civil servants may have different levels of ability. But a number of common lessons, which have emerged over McKinsey’s decades of experience in serving federal and state government transitions, may offer helpful thinking to new leaders. The following seven lessons will help leaders who are transitioning into government roles recognize and avoid potential failure during these unprecedented times:
	

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Leaders who are part of government transitions amid times of national and global crises inherit a heavy responsibility. A combination of the right mindsets and actions can not only shape the successful resolution of the present crises but also position new leaders to realize the visions they were elected to achieve.