

RAND is proud to celebrate 75 years of excellence in space research and analysis. In this document, we spotlight a small number of reports to highlight the range of our contributions and celebrate our commitment to making a difference for decades to come.




Read Online

Launching into the Future
75 Years of Excellence in Space Research at RAND
Related Topics: Space Science and Technology
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download Free Electronic Document

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


10.4 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










RAND is proud to celebrate 75 years of excellence in space research and analysis. In this document, we spotlight a small number of reports to highlight the range of our contributions and celebrate our commitment to making a difference for decades to come.

 Related Products 








Project
RAND Space Enterprise Initiative

Jul 9, 2020






Research conducted by

RAND National Security Research Division



This report is part of the RAND Corporation Corporate publication series. Corporate publications are program or department brochures, newsletters, pamphlets, and miscellaneous information about the RAND Corporation or RAND's business units. Some corporate publications are published in the AR series as Annual Reports or as Administrative Reports. Administrative Reports are often required by the client or sponsor and provide a status report on work resulting from a contract.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 5
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/CPA1513-1
Document Number: CP-A1513-1
Year: 2021
Series: Corporate Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Space Science and Technology

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Launching into the Future: 75 Years of Excellence in Space Research at RAND. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/corporate_pubs/CPA1513-1.html.
Launching into the Future: 75 Years of Excellence in Space Research at RAND, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, CP-A1513-1, 2021. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/corporate_pubs/CPA1513-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



