
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Call for nominations: Space Exploration Advisory Committee (SEAC) 2020
  

  
  

  
    
  The UK Space Agency is seeking nominations for members of its Space Exploration Advisory Committee (SEAC).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      7 July 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Space Exploration Advisory Committee: Call for Membership Nominations 2020
    
        ODT, 177KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Space Exploration Advisory Committee: Call for Nominations for new Chairperson 2020
    
        ODT, 175KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
SEAC is responsible for advising the Agency on matters relating to robotic and human space exploration programmes and meets four times a year. The Committee’s remit includes advising on UK participation in European exploration programmes (including Mars exploration and the International Space Station) and national level activities in support of these programmes.

UKSA is seeking a new Chair and three new members to represent each of the following disciplines:


  lunar science and exploration
  Mars science and exploration
  microgravity/space environments physical sciences




        
      

      
    Published 7 July 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Office of Rail Regulation PR13 launch
        ASPA e-newsletter October 2010

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    