Pandemic disruptions have added some uncertainty to the economic outlook for Thailand. But looking over the longer term at life beyond the pandemic, there is scope for optimism. Incomes are rising, and digital innovation is bringing down barriers to buying.  finds that consumption in Thailand could grow sharply from US$120 billion a year to US$410 billion over the next decade. By 2030, up to 90 percent of Thailand’s population could belong to the “consuming class”—spending more than $11 a day in purchasing power parity terms and therefore able to afford not only basics like food and housing, but also discretionary spending. That figure is up from 70 percent today and only 35 percent in 2000. The proportion of the population in the two highest tiers of consumers (spending more than $30 a day) is expected to double from today’s 20 percent to 40 percent in 2030. As a whole, Asia will account for one of every two of the world’s upper-middle-income and above households, and one of every two completed consumer transactions in the period to 2030. Overlook Asia and you could miss half of the global picture, a US$10 trillion consumption growth opportunity over the next decade. As part of a fast-growing dynamic regional economy, Thailand has solid prospects ahead. But the size of Asia’s consumer markets and its integrating regional economy is only one part of the story. Increasingly, in an era of demographic, social, and technological changes, a new chapter is being written that is all about rising diversity in this already diverse region. Ten shifts in the consumer landscape matter: 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Many companies across Asia appreciate these new angles on growth and are responding by developing innovative business models that are opening up access to goods and services to many consumers who were previously priced out of them. S-curves that climb steeply once income levels are high enough before plateauing may flatten out as the relationship between income and consumption breaks down in some categories. Gaming is a case in point. Gaming consoles are expensive; mobile gaming are often not, and this opens up access to those on lower incomes. While Thailand’s console gaming revenue per capita is relatively low, its penetration of mobile gaming is one of the highest in the world. Similar phenomena may play out in sectors from mobility to financial services as players find new ways of increasing access to lower-income consumers. The consumer map in Thailand, and in its home region, is being redrawn, opening up access, increasing affordability, and offering new opportunities to companies that are agile and informed enough to keep track of these dynamic new patterns. This article originally appeared in .