“The U.S. goal should remain to prevent Iran from getting nuclear weapons while avoiding another war in the Middle East.  For now, that means working out a step-by-step return to compliance with the nuclear deal by both Iran and the United States.  Building from that foundation, relevant parties need to find ways to further reduce the danger that Iran will pursue nuclear weapons, strengthen regional security, reduce terrorism in the region, and address other issues of mutual concern.  Fundamentally, U.S. and Iranian national interests would both be better served if they could find their way to a relationship less riven by conflict.”“The goal should be to verifiably prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon. To put the United States in a strong negotiating position, not just at this critical juncture but also going forward, we must rebuild unity and work with our P5+1/EU partners and directly engage Iran to develop a plan whereby the United States and Iran each returns to compliance. “Compliance for compliance” and reinstatement of the “,” provides key time and space to shape the negotiating environment following significant diplomatic setbacks in recent years. It also increases the prospects of potentially influencing Iran’s decision-making calculus in a manner more favorable to U.S. interests as we pursue additional nuclear and non-nuclear objectives in the coming years.” “The United States should swiftly attempt a  to the deal with a compliance-for-compliance approach because it can stop Iran’s quickly-growing nuclear program in its tracks. This move would not undermine U.S. leverage but rather enhance it. It would allow the United States to stop the ticking clock on Iran’s nuclear advancements, mitigate the possibility of a military confrontation between Iran and Israel or the United States, and restore multilateral diplomatic efforts. More importantly, returning to the deal would allow more time for follow-on agreements on regional issues and other areas of contention. These issues are critical to the security interests of the United States and its regional partners, and Tehran is unlikely to engage in any talks on these issues unless the JCPOA is restored.” ()“Both sides should return to the status quo as of 1/20/17 within 60 days.  Persistent flaws in the deal pose a greater challenge, including Iran‘s . Iran likely retains the illicit , violating both the JCOPOA and IAEA Safeguards. The JCPOA  on key issues, e.g. , limits on , and the procurement channel monitoring imports. These issues have nothing to do with the Trump Administration’s ham-fisted approach and demand resolution—using the deal’s compliance mechanisms—for the JCPOA to succeed.”