
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Take a case to the Technology and Construction Court
  

  
  
  
      
  How to take someone to court over a construction, building, engineering or another technically complex dispute.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Courts & Tribunals Service

      
      Published
      1 February 2016
      Last updated
      
        16 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          What cases you can bring to the court

        
        
          Help and support

        
        
          Before you start

        
        
          How to start a case

        
        
          Where to take or send your form

        
        
          Pay the court fee

        
        
          Serve the form

        
        
          After you serve the form

        
        
          Case management conference

        
        
          The hearing

        
        
          The decision

        
        
          If you disagree with the decision

        
        
          Hearing list

        
        
          Decisions on previous cases

        
        
          Rules and legislation

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
What cases you can bring to the court

You can use the court for a wide range of technically complex cases, such as over:


  construction, building or engineering (including adjudicators’ or arbitrators’ decisions)
  the design, installation or supply of computer systems
  advice provided by engineers, architects, surveyors or accountants


You can also ask a judge from the court to act as an arbitrator in your dispute.

See a longer list of types of technology and construction claim.

Cases worth up to £250,000 can be dealt with in a local county court, but your case will be heard in the High Court if it involves:


  more than £250,000
  very complex issues
  an international dispute
  adjudication or arbitration


High Court hearings usually take place in the Rolls Building in London but can be held in certain other courts around England and Wales.


Read the Technology and Construction Court guide for details of how to use the court.


Help and support

You can get legal advice from a solicitor or barrister.

Court staff can explain how the process works, but can’t give you legal advice.

Before you start

In most cases the court will expect you to write to the other side and to meet at least once before you start legal action.

You may be able to discuss other ways of solving the dispute, for instance by using an independent adjudicator or arbitrator named in your contract.


Read more about adjudication in construction contracts (PDF, 425KB, 29 pages).


How to start a case

To start court action, fill in the relevant form below.

Write ‘Technology and Construction Court’ in the top-right hand corner of the form.


  claim form (part 7)
  claim form (part 8)
  arbitration claim form


Use the part 8 form if the main facts aren’t in dispute – eg you disagree on the interpretation of a contract or the law.

Where to take or send your form

You can file your documents electronically. This online service also enables you to search cases, order copies of documents and pay fees.

You can take or send your form to one of the two courts in London or your local court centre.

London courts


  
Rolls Building for High Court claims
  
Central London County Court for county court claims


Local court centres


  Birmingham
  Bristol
  Cardiff
  Chester
  Exeter
  Leeds
  Liverpool
  Manchester
  Newcastle upon Tyne
  Nottingham


Pay the court fee

You will need to pay a court fee to start the case. This will be based on how much you want to claim from the other side.


  
    
      Claim amount up to…
      Court fee
    
  
  
    
      £300
      £35
    
    
      £500
      £50
    
    
      £1,000
      £70
    
    
      £1,500
      £80
    
    
      £3,000
      £115
    
    
      £5,000
      £205
    
    
      £10,000
      £455
    
    
      £200,000
      5% of the amount
    
  


If your case is worth more than £200,000 the fee is £10,000.

You can pay with cash, a credit/debit card, or a postal order or cheque (paid to ‘HM Courts and Tribunals Service’).

You may have to pay another fee of £1,090 for a court hearing later on.

Arbitration cases cost £2,455 for each day of the hearing.

Serve the form

The court will stamp a copy of your claim form. Give or send this copy to the person or company who will be defending the claim (known as the defendant).

You must also give them:


  an acknowledgment of service form

  notes for the defendant
  details of your case, known as the particulars of claim



The particulars should include all of the arguments and facts you want to use to support your case.

You can send the particulars with the form or within the next 14 days afterwards.

Send the court a certificate of service to confirm you’ve sent the documents.

After you serve the form

The defendant has 14 days to acknowledge the claim and 28 days to respond.

They can ask for more time to reply (up to 3 months).

If they don’t respond or defend the claim you can ask the court to decide the case in your favour.

If they defend the claim you will have the chance to reply to their points.

Case management conference

The court will arrange a ‘case management conference’ to discuss the next steps.

The conference is a meeting to agree on the date for the hearing, and how the case will be handled.

The judge will ask you about:


  the value of the dispute
  what you’ve spent so far on the case
  which experts you’d like to use


You and the defendant may be asked to use the same experts, to save on costs.

You will also be given a timetable for producing documents and making other arrangements, such as lining up witnesses.

There may be a follow-up ‘pre-trial review’ meeting, to check you’re ready for the hearing.

The hearing

Your hearing will usually be attended by:


  a circuit, district or High Court judge or a recorder – who will decide your case
  the defendant and their lawyer
  you and your lawyer
  any witnesses and experts


During the trial, your lawyer will have the chance to:


  make opening and closing statements
  call expert witnesses
  present expert reports
  question the witnesses


The courtroom will usually be open to the public.

What to expect coming to a court or tribunal

The decision

In most cases you won’t find out the judge’s decision on the day of the hearing.

The court will usually send you a copy of the draft judgment, to check for typos or other textual errors.

The judge or registrar will then formally issue the judgment.

If you disagree with the decision

You can ask the court for permission to appeal.

Include your reasons for appealing.

Find out more about appealing to the Court of Appeal.

Hearing list

Details of hearings for the next day are published on the daily cause list.

You may have to wait several months for a trial in London – or longer if the trial is likely to last more than a few days. Check the London Technology and Construction Court hearing times for details.

Decisions on previous cases

The court’s decisions on earlier cases are published on the British and Irish Legal Information Institute (BAILII) website.

Rules and legislation

You can find detailed rules on using the court in Part 60 and Practice Direction 60 of the Civil Procedure Rules.




      
        
    Published 1 February 2016
    Last updated 16 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 March 2020
              Add link to new hearing times page
            
            
              5 February 2020
              New link to content on what to expect coming to a court or tribunal.
            
            
              10 March 2017
              Information about ce-file.
            
            
              1 February 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Queen's Bench Division: bring a case to the court

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Planning and building
        Courts, sentencing and tribunals
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    