McKinsey’s Insurance Practice has partnered with the Insurance Industry Charitable Foundation to assess the state of charitable giving in the American insurance industry. A follow-up to the foundation’s previous work in 2011 and 2015, the goal of this research was to identify trends in charitable giving and to highlight opportunities for the industry to achieve greater impact through giving. In 2019, the survey was expanded to include responses from life insurance and wealth-management companies for the first time.In the survey of 22 companies, including insurers and brokers that represented over $200 billion in premiums, six results stood out:Although charitable giving within insurance has remained steady since 2015, a greater share of respondents says that the industry’s charitable giving now meets the public’s expectations. Cash donations or grants continue to make up a bulk of giving, representing 65 percent of total funding. Among respondents who participated in both 2015 and 2019 surveys, company-organized employee volunteering increased from 0 percent in 2015 to 17 percent in 2019. Health and social services, community, and education have continued to be the top causes for giving. Within these top three areas, contribution to community causes has increased (from 11 percent to 22 percent), while contribution to education has decreased (from 34 percent to 22 percent), and health or social services contribution has remained consistent.Geographically, about 30 percent of respondents prioritize giving to communities where employees live and work and where significant business is already done. While the top three factors in determining focus of corporate giving have not changed since 2011, respondents’ focus on alignment toward business needs is up from 14 percent to 22 percent.Goals for giving have also shifted from improving customer relations to building employee and leadership capabilities and skills—likely a reflection of millennial employees’ values. Insurers are responding to social trends that center on personal passion and volunteerism, ideas championed by many millennials. Indeed, respondents have noted millennial preferences, such as a desire to work for companies that are involved in charitable causes, to support for philanthropic causes that relate to personal interests, and to volunteer instead of making monetary contributions. Another sign of millennials employees’ influence could be the shift from improving customer relations toward goals related to building employee and leadership capabilities. Aside from making a social impact, 41 percent of respondents cited enhancing their corporate reputation or brand as the most important outcome of philanthropy.The number of companies that measure the benefits of their philanthropic activities has steadily increased. In 2019, 41 percent of respondents stated that they use metrics or key performance indicators to assess the impact of charitable giving, compared with 26 percent of respondents who said so in the 2015 survey (exhibit). A growing share of insurers also mentioned commissioning external assessments to track the outcome of their giving efforts (9 percent of respondents in 2019, compared with none in 2011). At the same time, the share of insurers that do not track or measure social impact decreased from 43 percent in 2015 to 16 percent in 2019. This increased monitoring is likely driven by a growing awareness of the importance of transparency over charitable outcomes—73 percent of respondents think it’s important to communicate charitable giving efforts to the public. A notable trend is the decrease in CEO’s involvement in giving since 2011. Specifically, the CEO is no longer heavily involved in making specific funding decisions and instead focuses on setting the overall direction of charitable efforts.In 2019, 68 percent of respondents said that CEOs set the overall direction and 18 percent said that they make specific funding decisions. These figures are a near-reversal from 2015, when 48 percent of respondents stated that their CEOs set the overall direction and 61 percent said the CEO made specific funding decisions. This shift in the CEO’s role away from direct involvement and toward one of overall guidance points to the evolving skills in insurers’ CSR leadership. Indeed, CSR and corporate foundation teams have assumed a more strategic orientation, with increasingly skilled staff and leaders at the helm.For organizations looking to amplify either the impact of their philanthropic efforts or the range of causes, our findings point to a few key opportunities:Although total industry charitable giving has been consistent, the care and consideration devoted to CSR—which insurers increasingly treat as an important function—has increased. Indeed, charitable-giving leaders seem to hold increasing decision-making power, which allows insurers to be more responsive to stakeholder needs such as volunteer opportunities for employees and industry collaboration on philanthropic initiatives. Expanding efforts to track and measure the effects of philanthropy will help CSR leaders more easily identify areas of focus and highlight successes. These successes—backed by data and institutional resources—could light the way for the next change-making initiative that benefits the industry, employees, and (most importantly) communities.