
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apprenticeships at the Defence Electronics and Components Agency
  

  
  
  
      
  A detailed guide to 2021 apprenticeships offered by the Defence Electronics and Components Agency (DECA);  what we offer and how to apply.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Electronics and Components Agency

      
      Published
      22 March 2017
      Last updated
      
        23 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About DECA


        
        
          Apprenticeships we are currently recruiting for

        
        
          What we’re looking for

        
        
          Applications and further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
An apprenticeship with the Defence Electronics and Components Agency (DECA) gives you the opportunity to join us at a time of exciting change and growth.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, DECA provided essential support to the RAF by supplying an Air Separation Unit to the Falkland Islands.  The ASU  produces liquid oxygen, liquid nitrogen and gaseous oxygen essential for the production of oxygen for the King Edward Memorial Hospital in Port Stanley.  DECA provided this critical equipment in response to urgent COVID-19 support requirements on the Falklands and also deployed to aid installation during the crisis. Commander British Forces South Atlantic Islands presented two DECA personnel with the Commander British Forces medal for their efforts on the project and for helping to ensure the ASU installation was a success.

Assigned the contract to become the global repair hub for the UK’s new fighter jet, the F-35, DECA will provide repair, maintenance, overhaul and upgrade of electronic and electrical components, fuel, mechanical and hydraulic systems and ejection seats for the world famous platform.  Our involvement in the support solution for F-35 will continue to develop our cutting-edge capabilities and secure investment and growth in our infrastructure and people and continue our proud heritage of providing pivotal support to our Armed Forces for many years to come. Joining our apprentice scheme will provide you with the opportunity to pursue an extremely rewarding career supporting UK Defence and the Armed Forces.

Picture shows the Air Separation Unit loaded and ready for sending to the Falkland Islands during the COVID-19 crisis


The UK's F-35B fifth generation multi-role aircraft.  Crown Copyright

About DECA

We are part of the UK MOD and support UK Armed Forces by providing expert electronic, optronic, avionic, cryptographic and general engineering repair, maintenance, overhaul and upgrade services to MOD and our industry partners.  Our people’s skill and expertise make DECA a lean and forward thinking business with an impressive pedigree of military capabilities.
We employ around 450 staff in Flintshire and Staffordshire and deployed teams across the UK.  As MOD civil servants, our staff can also deploy overseas in direct support of UK military operations.

DECA has exceptional facilities that include:


  purpose built electronic workshops
  fuel pump test facilities
  accredited calibration laboratories
  class 4 Tempest cleared cryptographic maintenance and storage facilities
  audiometric laboratory
  cryogenics school of excellence
  carpentry shops
  engineering work shops



DECA purpose aim and values

Our purpose

To be a trusted MOD and Industry partner, delivering assured electronics and components capability in support of Defence

Our aim

We aim to be a highly professional team delivering benchmark support services to our customers.

Our values

We value our people by:


  creating an environment where all employees are proud to be part of DECA

  engaging with individuals and Trades Unions to include their views in decision making
  offering development opportunities to help realise full potential and recognise achievement
  respecting the knowledge and expertise of all employees and encouraging engagement


We promote teamwork and co-operation by:


  providing inspired leadership, encouraging empowerment and accountability
  working together with each other to achieve our purpose and aims
  actively supporting diversity and valuing everybody’s contribution


We care for our customers and stakeholders by committing to:


  understanding our customers’ needs through the development of strong relationships
  delivering high quality products and reliable services
  responding with urgency and developing agile and forward thinking solutions
  working to nationally and internationally recognised standards and accreditation
  fostering a positive presence in our local community


We deliver best value for defence and continuously improve by:


  striving for excellence in every aspect of our business
  further developing our responsiveness, flexibility and resilience
  being open to change and prepared to manage risk
  developing new capabilities to meet changing Defence requirements



Microwave communication technology capability at DECA.  Copyright DECA

Apprenticeships we are currently recruiting for

Technical Apprenticeship, Sealand and Stafford

We offer a three stage MOD sponsored modern apprenticeship

Year 1 – full time at college
Successful apprentices will achieve


  
NVQ Level 2 in Performing Engineering Operations


Year 2 - based at DECA with instructors with college day release

Successful apprentices will achieve:


  
BTEC National Diploma in Electrical/Electronic Engineering


Year 3 - full time at DECA alongside qualified technicians

Successful apprentices will achieve:


  
NVQ Level 3 based on specific trade requirement of apprentice


Earn as you learn


  
    Phase 1 - £14,853 p.a.
  
  
    Phase 2 - £15,796 p.a.
  
  
    Phase 3 - £18,731 p.a.
  


Other benefits


  
    nationally recognised qualifications
  
  
    26.5 days paid annual leave and 9 days public holidays
  
  
    generous pension scheme
  


As an apprentice, you may be offered a permanent role within DECA following successful completion of your apprenticeship and your continued studies to gain a BTEC Higher National Certificate.

We are committed to providing opportunities for employees to further their careers within DECA and the wider MOD and we fully support professional development such as higher education learning, MOD placements and membership of professional associations.

DECA shot blast facility.  Copyright DECA

What we’re looking for

We are looking for highly motivated individuals with a real commitment to learn.  Joining our business will be an exciting opportunity for you to make an impression, demonstrate your energy and drive, learn new skills, contribute to the delivery of business objectives, and most importantly become a valued member of our team.  If you think this opportunity is interesting, a career at DECA might be just what you are looking for.

Our minimum requirements

Applicants will need to achieve the following as minimum entry qualifications:


  
    Four subjects GCSE at grade C/4 or above (including Maths, English and a relevant science or engineering subject)
  
  
    You will be required to demonstrate in your application and, where applicable at interview, that you meet the requirements of the specified competences
  
  
    You may need to pass a colour perception test, a hand skills and aptitude test and may be required to attend a medical examination
  


Your minimum age


  You will need to be 16 years on or before 31 August 2021


Applications and further information

Technical Apprenticeship Sealand
You can apply for this apprenticeship

You can also visit the civil service website and enter job references
108048

Technical Apprenticeship Stafford
You can apply for this apprenticeship

You can also visit the civil service website and enter job references
108090

The closing date for receipt of completed application forms is midnight on 15th April 2021

Important note
If you are due to sit GCSE examinations during 2021 please enter predicted grades in the qualification section of the application form.  Evidence of achieved grades will be required prior to completion of the recruitment process.

These are non-reserved posts open to UK nationals, commonwealth citizens and European Economic Area (EEA) nationals of other member states and certain members of their families who are non-EEA nationals.

The MOD is an Equal Opportunities employer and seeks to reflect the diverse community it serves.  Applications are welcome from anyone who meets the stated requirements.  Please note we treat all information supplied in connection with this advertisement in accordance with the Data Protection Act 1998.  For further information regarding the Civil Service Pension Scheme, please visit Civil Service Pensions


RAF Typhoon and ground support equipment





      
        
    Published 22 March 2017
    Last updated 23 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 March 2021
              Release of 2021 apprenticeship places
            
            
              13 May 2020
              Technical apprenticeship details fro Stafford vacancies
            
            
              2 April 2020
              Extended closing date for 2020 apprenticeships at DECA
            
            
              19 March 2020
              Latest apprenticeship details for 2020 recruitment campaign
            
            
              24 May 2019
              new apprenticeships released
            
            
              20 March 2019
              Now reflects 2019 apprenticeships
            
            
              23 May 2018
              Apprenticeships released
            
            
              13 March 2018
              DECA has released new apprenticeship opportunities with a closing date of 23 March 2018
            
            
              15 June 2017
              The application stage for these apprenticeships is now closed
            
            
              1 June 2017
              Closing date extended to 9 June 2017
            
            
              31 May 2017
              Update to the apprenticeship qualification and extension of closing date
            
            
              19 May 2017
              New apprenticeship opportunities released
            
            
              7 April 2017
              This scheme is now closed.  Further schemes may be released and this detailed guide will be updated to reflect availability
            
            
              22 March 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence Commercial Graduate Programme brochure
        Eleanor May: medical physicist in a vital role for the MOD
        Dstl careers: from soldier and student to engineering scientist
        DESG Graduate Scheme: Alex
        Dstl careers: Peter, senior systems engineer

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    