
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    On-Street Residential Chargepoint Scheme guidance for local authorities
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for local authorities on grants to provide on-street residential chargepoints for plug-in electric vehicles.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Office for Zero Emission Vehicles

      
      Published
      22 December 2016
      Last updated
      
        24 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    On-Street Residential Chargepoint Scheme guidance for local authorities
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    On-street Residential Chargepoint Scheme application form
    
        ODT, 16.9KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ozev.enquiries@dft.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Local authorities can apply for funding to help with the costs of procurement and installation of on-street charging points for residential use.

This guidance explains:


  who can apply for the funding
  how much funding is available
  the application process and timetable
  the minimum technical specifications required for on-street electric vehicle chargepoint infrastructure





        
      

      
    Published 22 December 2016
    Last updated 24 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 November 2021
              Addition of fire safety guidance.
            
            
              1 April 2021
              Updated guidance increasing funding per chargepoint unit to £13,000, removing project size requirements, clarifying expectations regarding installations in local authority-owned car parks, and stating that projects with a completion date no later than 31 March 2023 will be considered.
            
            
              20 May 2020
              Changes to the grant payment process.
            
            
              24 March 2020
              Guidance has been revised to include changes to the grant cap per chargepoint, and our approach to allocating funding.
            
            
              4 April 2019
              Updated to provide clearer guidance to local authorities on eligibility when applying for funding.
            
            
              12 January 2018
              Guidance revised for additional funding.
            
            
              22 December 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Electric Vehicle Homecharge Scheme: guidance for installers
        Grants for plug-in vehicles
        Electric Vehicle Homecharge Scheme: customer guidance
        Electric Vehicle Homecharge Scheme approved chargepoint model list
        Workplace Charging Scheme authorised installers

  




      

    Collection

  


        Grant schemes for electric vehicle charging infrastructure
        Local government, climate change and the environment

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low emission and electric vehicles
        Local transport funding
        Climate change and energy

  


  

  


    
  


    