Under the Trump Administration, our Nation is leveraging our energy bounty to benefit the American people. We’re pursuing a true “all-of-the-above” energy strategy that harnesses the power of nuclear, solar, wind, coal, natural gas, oil, hydropower, and many other energy technologies. But there is more to our story; we’re being good environmental stewards by keeping our air, water, and land clean for generations to come.In recent years, the Department of Energy (DOE) has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in the innovation needed to capture carbon emissions, use it as a feedstock for valuable products, store it safely underground, and make sure that we do so in a cost-effective way.On September 1,  the award of nearly $72 million in federal funding to support the development and advancement of carbon capture technologies under two funding research and develop (R&D) opportunity announcements. The first announcement awarded $51 million to nine new carbon capture projects for coal and natural gas power plants and industrial sources. The second announcement awarded a total of $21 million to eighteen projects for technologies that remove carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere, a process known as direct air capture.This R&D will build on the work started under my predecessor, Secretary Rick Perry. In 2017, Secretary Perry tasked the National Petroleum Council to perform two studies, one on , and one on ), both of which were released in December 2019.The CCUS study’s overarching goal was to define potential pathways leading to its deployment at commercial scale, with the understanding that achievement of this objective for the United States would promote economic growth and prosperity, protect the environment, and enhance our energy security.This report drew on a diverse set of stakeholders, involving over 300 participants from 110 different organizations, including 17 international members. Over half of the participants are employed by organizations outside of the oil and natural gas industry.The study found that there is untold potential not just for capturing CO2, but in job creation as well. As Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy Steven Winberg , “Our ultimate goal is to mature these technologies so that they can be brought to a commercial CO2 market.”Once that happens, Americans across the country will find meaningful work in the CCUS field.DOE is committed to supporting these projects to encourage the innovation and research that will allow the private sector to drive the development and entrepreneurship for which America is known. Part of our mission is to ensure our Nation’s security and prosperity by addressing its through transformative science and technology solutions. Our public and private sector partnership on CCUS is a new frontier that will further strengthen American energy leadership in the 21st century.