Farah Fahim is a senior engineer specializing in mixed signal application specific integrated circuit design at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. Farah is currently the Deputy Head of Quantum Science at the Fermi Quantum Institute. For over 15 years Farah has been developing low noise, high-speed readout and control electronics for detectors which operate in harsh environments for a wide range of applications from high energy physics, space science and quantum science. Before joining Fermilab, Farah worked at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK. Farah has a PhD in Electrical Engineering from Northwestern University, MBA from Open University, UK, M.Tech and B.Tech from University of Limerick, Ireland. Her research has been published in many scholarly journals and has been presented at conferences worldwide. She co-organized the first workshop on cryogenic electronics for quantum systems (IceQubes).My grandmother was a teacher and the way she taught me math induced a love for the subject. I think math is both logical and creative which is why I got into engineering. I find it intriguing and challenging.I love that my work is very creative, I find myself pushing technological boundaries to achieve the goals of my project. I am also proud of being involved in pioneering work which will significantly contribute to future advances in technology.I suppose there are several myths associated with a career in STEM, scientist/engineers are nerds, lack of work life balance, extremely competitive work environments. Along with a few unhelpful facts like STEM fields particularly engineering are lonely, male dominated environments. Outreach activities which reduce stereotypes is an excellent way of getting children involved in STEM when they are young. Role models would definitely help engage more girls/women. Focusing on increasing diversity and educating people on the importance of diversity in the workplace will go a long way.I feel networking is very important in the field of research, getting to know the right people, reading latest technical publications and being perceptive makes a lot of difference. Serendipity plays a huge role too. I also think getting a mentor is very important, it definitely helped me a lot.With four kids I don’t get much time. I create a lot of fused glass artwork, the kiln does most of the work. I enjoy gardening, kayaking, travelling and reading. Learn more about our programs & resources for women and girls in STEM at 