
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Recommendations from the independent Expert Advisory Group on the use of Paclitaxel Drug-Coated Balloons and Drug-Eluting Stents to the MHRA
  

  
  

  
    
  The findings and recommendations of the Expert Advisory Group on paclitaxel drug-coated balloon catheters and drug-eluting stents which are used to treat patients with peripheral arterial disease.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency

      
      Published
      3 June 2019
      Last updated
      
        18 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Recommendations from the independent Expert Advisory Group on the use of Paclitaxel Drug-Coated Balloons (DCBs) and Drug-Eluting Stents (DESs) to the MHRA
    
        PDF, 229KB, 12 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email webupdates@mhra.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Recommendations from the independent Expert Advisory Group on the use of Paclitaxel Drug Coated Balloons (DCBs) and Drug Eluting Stents (DESs) to the MHRA
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The EAG recommended that these devices are not used to treat patients with intermittent claudication (a pain in the leg caused by the lack of blood flow).

This is a condition that may be treated effectively with other devices and therapies. The devices may still be considered in patients with critical limb ischaemia (severe obstruction of the arteries), where it is felt that the benefits outweigh the risks and taking NICE guidance into account. If these devices are to be used there should be enhanced patient follow-up.

The MHRA encourages anyone – patient, carer or healthcare professional, who knows of a safety problem or adverse event that is or might be linked to a medical device, to report to us. Patients can report via the Yellow Card scheme.

Healthcare professionals should report any suspected or actual adverse incidents involving these devices through your healthcare institution’s local incident reporting system and/or your national incident reporting authority as appropriate: England, Scotland, Northern Ireland, Wales.



        
      

      
    Published 3 June 2019
    Last updated 18 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              18 February 2021
              Updated following review of new evidence in 2020 (no change to advice).
            
            
              4 June 2019
              Updated to include link to MHRA's MDA on the issue.
            
            
              3 June 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Vigilance, safety alerts and guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    