







Opinion
Why Institutional Review Boards Should Have a Role in the Open Science MovementPublished in: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Volume 116, No. 43, pages 21336–21338 (2019). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1916420116 Posted on RAND.org on May 27, 2021
by Sean Grant, Kathryn E. Bouskill
Related Topics: Science of Science, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at Proceedings of the National Academy of SciencesThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








Open science involves the use of practices across the research life cycle that facilitate the transparency, reproducibility, and availability of scientific products and output. Prominent open science practices include registration of study protocols and preanalysis plans; materials, data, and code sharing; and publication of summary findings in open access outlets. To achieve openness as the default approach, initiatives are trying to use a systems approach to engage stakeholders—namely, scientific journals, funding agencies, and professional societies. Proponents hope to realign the research enterprise with the values of transparency and reproducibility.

Access further information on this document at Proceedings of the National Academy of SciencesThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

RAND Social and Economic Well-Being



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: National Academy of Sciences
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 3
Document Number: EP-68651
Year: 2019
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Science of ScienceScience, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




