As we are all well aware, the original Cold War, which  this month, featured a number of close calls that almost turned it into a hot war. Thankfully, neither the  of 1962 nor  (nor ), led to a war between Washington and Moscow. More recently, however, respected statesmen have again begun to sound alarms. “Not since the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis has the risk of a U.S.-Russian confrontation involving the use of nuclear weapons been as high as it is today,” former U.S. Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz and former U.S. Sen. Sam Nunn warned in a recent article in . I  about this proposition, but it is nevertheless worth asking what it is—other than the fear of mutually assured destruction—that keeps the U.S. and Russia from stumbling into a war today or tomorrow. Part of the answer lies in the bilateral and multilateral agreements specifically designed to prevent incidents that could escalate into a war. As is clear from the list below, there are at least half a dozen bilateral agreements between Moscow and Washington that have been concluded for the purposes of preventing dangerous military incidents. These deals include the 1972 U.S.-Soviet agreement on prevention of incidents on and over the high seas and the 1989 U.S.-Soviet agreement on prevention of dangerous military activities. Some other NATO members—including the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Norway, Spain, the Netherlands, Canada, Greece and Portugal—have agreements with Russia on prevention of incidents on the high seas that are similar to the 1972 agreement between Moscow and Washington, while Canada and Greece also have agreements with Russia on prevention of dangerous military activities. However, almost a dozen NATO members have no such agreements with Russia, even though they abut seas. These countries include Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania and Slovenia. Nor are there any multilateral NATO-Russia (or NATO-Collective Security Treaty Organization) agreements on prevention of dangerous military incidents, though a NATO-Russia Memorandum of Understanding on avoiding and managing such incidents has been  in Track II.  The U.S. and its NATO allies should consider forming a unified position and approach Russia about formal negotiations on how some of the existing U.S.-Russian agreements on avoiding incidents could be multilaterized, shifting from a bilateral format to a multilateral NATO-Russia format. In particular, NATO and Russia should discuss multilaterizing the 1989 U.S.-Soviet agreement on prevention of dangerous military activities. NATO and Russia could discuss including concrete mechanisms on actual prevention of incidents in such existing multilateral agreements as the 2011 Vienna Document and the Convention on International Civil Aviation, including, perhaps, a requirement for warplanes to fly with their transponders turned on at all times while in international airspace.1 The U.S. and its NATO allies should also, of course, discuss how to save the Open Skies Treaty of 1992.In addition to enhancing the legal framework for prevention of incidents, Russian and Western leaders should also make sure their military commanders do not take unauthorized actions that increase the risk of an accident that could unintentionally lead to a conflict. There have been quite a few instances when the U.S. and Russian militaries have accused each other of unsafe behavior during one and the same encounter. For instance, in June 2019 the U.S. Navy  the Russian Navy’s Admiral Vinogradov anti-submarine destroyer of “maneuver[ing] from behind and to the right of [U.S. missile cruiser] Chancellorsville, accelerat[ing] and clos[ing] to an unsafe distance" as the U.S. warship was recovering a helicopter within 50 meters of the Russian ship  in the Philippine Sea. The Russian Navy in turn  the Chancellorsville of unsafe maneuvers, saying this cruiser crossed the Russian destroyer’s path and then abruptly changed direction. Earlier, Russian President Vladimir Putin had commented on risk-taking by his senior military officials after Russia’s taking of Crimea: In a documentary-style film about those events, which aired on Russian state television in March 2015, the then commander of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, Alexander Vitko, describes how a Su-24 attack plane was sent to fly low over the deck of the USS Donald Cook in April 2014: “It was decided to show use and resolve to use force.” When the documentary’s creator Andrei Kondrashov asks Putin to comment, the Russian president says: “It was not my decision. It was hooliganism on their [the commanders’] part and they didn’t even tell me anything about it.”   Last but not least, the sides should discuss how to prevent incidents in one domain that did not exist during the original Cold War. That domain is cyber and it is essential that the U.S. and Russia, which both now have cyber troops, and their allies discuss how to prevent incidents in that domain that could ultimately lead to an accidental war. In doing so they could take a cue from various sources, among them the aforementioned  of 1989, which warns against “interfering with command and control networks in a manner which could cause harm to personnel or damage to equipment of the armed forces of the other Party.”A new Cold War may indeed be inevitable. Some say it has already started. However, that doesn’t mean the U.S., its allies and Russia cannot jointly work to reduce grave but common risks potentially posed by unintended military incidents.Contents:Operational status:  Remains in force.Contents includes:Operational status: Remains in force.Contents:Operational status: Remains in force.Contents: the signatories agree Operational status: Remains in force, “of unlimited duration.”Contents: “Each Party shall take necessary measures directed toward preventing dangerous military activities, which are the following activities of personnel and equipment of its armed forces when operating in proximity to personnel and equipment of the armed forces of the other Party during peacetime:Operational status: Remains in force.Contents:Operational status: Unclear.Contents:Operational status: Remains in force.U.S. and Russian officers reportedly  the Euphrates River as a dividing line in Syria and on a system of advance notifications prior to any river crossings.Operational status: Unclear.(both U.S. and Russia are signatories, as is China)Contents:Operational status: Remains in force.(signed by Australia, Brunei, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, France, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, Tonga, the United States and Vietnam at the Western Pacific Naval Symposium)Contents:Operational status: Remains in force, but non-binding. Contents:Operational status: Remains in force.Contents: Provides for notification, no less than 24 hours in advance, of the planned date, launch area and area of impact for any launch of an ICBM or SLBM. The agreement also provides that these notifications be provided through the Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers.Contents: The agreement  for each party to give the other advance notification of one major strategic-forces exercise that includes the participation of heavy bombers each year.Operational status: Remains in force.Contents: Addresses 21st century challenges including:Operational status: Suspended in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.Contents: A White House fact sheet’s section on “ICT Confidence-Building Measures” says:Operational status: Suspended in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.Contents:Operational status: Russia its participation in 2007, citing the ongoing delay of the adapted treaty’s entry into force by some of the signatories.Contents:Operational status: Remains in force, though the Trump administration is reportedly planning to .Contents: States that, in building their relationship, NATO and Russia will aim for:Operational status: Remains in force, but non-binding.Contents:Operational status: Remains in force.Footnotes:1. At the NATO-Russia Council meeting of July 13, 2016, Russian diplomats  offered a new plan that would commit Russian and all other planes flying over the Baltic Sea to switch on their transponders, a step that helps civil aviation authorities track flights and avoid near misses. More recently, U.S. Air Forces in Europe commander Gen. Jeffrey Harrigian  in September 2019 that a direct line of communication between NATO air commanders and their Russian counterparts could be helpful in deescalating tensions.2. “‘Special Caution Area’ means a region, designated mutually by the Parties, in which personnel and equipment of their armed forces are present and, due to circumstances in the region, in which special measures shall be undertaken in accordance with this Agreement.”3. Army Gen. Lloyd Austin, the head of U.S. Central Command, signed the protocol on the U.S. side.