
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    How to calculate the net volume of professional refrigerated storage cabinets
  

  
  

  
    
  Calculating the net volume of professional refrigerated storage cabinets for Energy Technology List product applications.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      1 July 2014
      Last updated
      
        1 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    ETL guidance note 8: Calculating the net volume of professional refrigerated storage cabinets
    
        PDF, 236KB, 4 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance note is intended to be read alongside the criteria for PRSCs. It describes in details how to calculate the net volume of PRSCs. Product applications should follow this approach and include calculations and drawings to demonstrate how the net volume has been calculated for the products concerned.



        
      

      
    Published 1 July 2014
    Last updated 1 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 April 2020
              On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the ECA and First Year Tax Credits Scheme (FYTC) will end from April 2020 for products on the ETL. This ETL publication has been updated to remove references to the ECA.
            
            
              1 July 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Hazardous materials: operational guidance for the fire and rescue service

  




      

    Collection

  


        Energy Technology Criteria List (ETCL): information by categories

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Greenhouse gas emissions

  


  

  


    
  


    