We are excited to highlight three more Department of Energy National Labs from our  poster series! From advancements in medical imaging to new cathode technologies, our Labs are turning out incredible innovations each and every day! Read more below!Power up! Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) is energizing the electric car industry with the advancement of cathode technologies. The Nickel Manganese Cobalt (NMC) blended cathode structure provides the greatest energy storage capacity available (50% to 100% increase in energy storage capacity over earlier cathode technologies) along with improved safety and increased battery lifespan all in the smallest and lightest package on the market. This groundbreaking technology application has been licensed to four corporations and can be found in electric cars, power tools and beyond.Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab) is improving the medical imaging industry with the advancement of conventional breast cancer screening tools. JLab’s development of Breast Specific Gamma Imaging, also known as Molecular Breast Imaging (MBI) technology improves odds of survival by detecting cancers earlier and more accurately. This results in reducing unnecessary follow-on diagnostics, less invasive treatment, and higher quality of life for patients and their families.In today’s world, we highly rely on secure communications. Enter the Quantrandor from Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)! The Quantrandor depends on the unpredictable nature of quantum mechanics to generate an inexhaustible stream of truly random numbers fast enough (200 megabits of random numbers per second!) to handle the increasing demands of modern encrypted communications. The incredible speed and security of the Quantrandor will help industry strengthen private communications for the quantum future.Don’t forget to check out our first two spotlights , and !The Advancing America through Technology Transfer poster series from the Office of Technology Transitions celebrates the many DOE-powered innovations produced by the 17 National Laboratories across the DOE complex. To learn more about this series, explore more .