

RAND American Instructional Resources Survey (AIRS) Project
Through the American Instructional Resources Survey (AIRS), RAND is investigating the use of instructional materials in K–12 English language arts, mathematics, and science classrooms across the United States. AIRS is intended to examine the factors related to use of standards-aligned curricula, and how curriculum use and supports for curriculum use are related to teaching. The AIRS project has been made possible through generous support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Charles and Lynn Schusterman Foundation, and the Overdeck Family Foundation.
Recent Findings

/content/rand/education-and-labor/projects/aep/selected-projects/airs/jcr:content/par/teaserlist



The Rise of Standards-Aligned Instructional Materials for U.S. K–12 TeachersMany states and education organizations have been pushing for greater use of standards-aligned curriculum, especially in recent years. What proportion of U.S. K–12 public teachers were using standards-aligned curriculum materials for their mathematics and English language arts instruction during the 2020–2021 school year?



/content/rand/education-and-labor/projects/aep/selected-projects/airs/jcr:content/par/teaserlist_2000478016



School Leaders' Role in Selecting Instructional MaterialsSchool leaders' perceptions of instructional materials influence their decisions about how to support teachers' material use. What does the selection process for instructional materials look like? And what role—if any—do school leaders play?


Did Experience with Digital Instructional Materials Help Teachers Implement Remote Learning During COVID-19?Understanding how teachers used digital materials leading up to the pandemic can shed light on how prepared they were to pivot to virtual learning. Where are some areas in which additional supports could be helpful in using digital materials for both virtual and in-person instruction?


Teachers' Perceptions of What Makes Instructional Materials Engaging, Appropriately Challenging, and UsableHow do middle and high school English language arts and mathematics teachers use and perceive their instructional materials? Insight into teachers' perceptions of their materials is especially important during COVID-19 pandemic as teachers adapt for online learning.


Changing the Subject: K–12 Teachers' Use of and Access to Science-Specific Instructional MaterialsPreparing students for careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields requires coordinated support for science instructors. To what extent are teachers using self-created or non-curriculum materials as part of their main science instructional materials?


Teachers' Lesson Modifications for Students with DisabilitiesModifications to curricula and lesson plans can help reduce some of the learning barriers that students with disabilities often face. What proportion of teachers substantially modify their lessons to make them more appropriate for students with disabilities?


Do Teachers Perceive That Their Main Instructional Materials Meet English Learners' Needs?Equitable access to academic content is critical in addressing achievement gaps between English learners and native English speakers. But schools and teachers face several challenges in enabling this access. Do teachers feel prepared to work effectively with English learners?


The Digital Divide and COVID-19Findings from a survey of U.S. teachers reveal how limited home internet access has been a barrier to providing instruction amid pandemic-related school closures. The problem is particularly acute among high-poverty schools.


How Instructional Materials Are Used and Supported in U.S. K–12 ClassroomsIf a curriculum is well-aligned with state standards, it can help teachers deliver instruction that leads to students’ mastery of those standards. But what supports are teachers offered to use standards-aligned curricula? And how do use and support vary among teachers in states and schools with different poverty levels?


What Digital Materials Do Teachers Use?Digital materials for lesson planning and instruction are becoming an increasingly important resource for teachers. A survey of English language arts, mathematics, and science teachers across the United States provides insights on which materials they use and what they consider barriers to use.


How Teachers Use Intervention ProgramsAcademic intervention programs support students who are performing below grade level. When asked about their use of these programs, U.S. teachers were more likely to report using them in English language arts than in mathematics. Teachers also reported using a wide variety of interventions.


More About the AIRS Project
AIRS grew out of recent projects from RAND documenting that most of the instructional materials teachers report using in their classrooms—and ones that are required by school systems—are not well-aligned with standards recently adopted in most states. This matters because RAND reports have connected teachers’ use of standards-aligned materials with higher teacher knowledge about their standards and more frequent use of standards-aligned instructional practices.
This and other research demonstrating positive effects of curricula in some settings have fueled state interest in use of materials as a policy lever for educational improvement, and many states have begun to encourage use of more standards-aligned curricula in classrooms. Nonetheless, we do not know enough about how state reform efforts are changing what curriculum materials teachers use and what factors support teachers’ use of curriculum.
To address gaps in what we know about curriculum use, AIRS is collecting data via the RAND American School Leader Panel and American Teacher Panel on topics that include:

Curriculum materials regularly used by K–12 public school teachers for English language arts, mathematics and science instruction, as well as district curriculum requirements
How curriculum use is supported in U.S. schools
Coherence among standards, curriculum, professional development and other elements of K–12 instructional systems
Teachers’ knowledge of their standards and their ELA, math, and science instructional practices.
A national sample of U.S school leaders who are part of the RAND American School Leader Panel.

AIRS is fielded to school leaders and teachers in Spring 2019, Spring 2020, and Spring 2021.Explore AIRS Data
We invite you to explore the AIRS 2019 data in Bento, a free online data visualization tool. Bento allows you to filter and segment survey results by school characteristics or educator background, compare data to state and national averages, and export visualizations for reports. Learn more and get access to Bento here.

In fall 2020, a public-use version of AIRS data will become available on the AEP Data Portal. The public version of these data will not include teachers' states or the specific curricula they used, but it will include limited school demographic data and and some summary information about their curriculum use. In addition, restricted-access AIRS data files will be available that researchers can purchase. These restricted files will include information suppressed in the public version (e.g. teachers’ state and demographic information). Further information on how to apply for access to restricted data files will be available on the AEP Data Portal.Curriculum Matters
RAND reports over the past several years have documented that most of the instructional materials teachers report using in their classrooms—and ones that are required by school systems—are not well-aligned with standards recently adopted in most states. This matters because RAND reports have connected teachers’ use of standards-aligned materials with higher teacher knowledge about their standards and more frequent use of standards-aligned instructional practices.

/content/rand/education-and-labor/projects/aep/selected-projects/airs/jcr:content/par/teaserlist_200047801



How Well Do Math Teachers Follow Common Core State Standards?


The Majority of Teachers Aren't Clear on the Reading Instruction Approaches Most Aligned with State Standards


This and other research demonstrating positive effects of curricula in some settings have fueled state interest in use of materials as a policy lever for educational improvement, and many states have begun to encourage use of more standards-aligned curricula in classrooms. Nonetheless, we know very little about the mechanisms by which curricula may support improved teaching and learning and, thus, what advice to give to policymakers and educators about the best and most productive uses of curricula.

