
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Science and Innovation Network Country Snapshot: Saudi Arabia
  

  
  

  
    
  An introductory brief from the UK Science and Innovation Network which covers the local Science and Innovation landscape, UK priorities and successes in Saudi Arabia.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      12 December 2016
      Last updated
      
        20 August 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    UK Science and Innovation Network Country Snapshot: Saudi Arabia
    
        PDF, 590KB, 4 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Science and Innovation Network engages with the local science & innovation community in support of UK policy overseas and also creates strategic relationships.

Science and innovation are at the heart of government strategy for promoting prosperity and growth. Research and knowledge is increasingly developed and transferred through international collaboration which provides opportunities to work with the best in the world, exchange students and researchers, and gain access to large scale international facilities; leading to mutual benefits for the UK and Saudi Arabia.

Responsibilities

The Science and Innovation Network (SIN) has more than 100 officers in over 40 countries and territories around the world building partnerships and collaborations on science and innovation.

In Saudi Arabia, SIN is working on the following global objectives:


  Establishing the UK as Saudi Arabia’s pivotal partner of choice in science and innovation.
  Supporting the Saudi Arabia in enhancing their resilience and security by addressing long-term threats, including emerging health issues and global challenges on water and food security, as well as through building their capacity to deliver evidence-based policies.
  Increasing trade and investment cooperation in education, healthcare, environment, water & food security, clean energy, cyber security, artificial intelligence and smart cities.
  Broadening security cooperation between the UK and Saudi Arabia – keeping Britain, and our interests, safe.
  Strengthening bilateral relationship through engagement on science and innovation.
  Helping Saudi Arabia to deliver on Vision 2030 and achieving economic diversification.
  Engaging with the next generation of thinkers.
  Helping Saudi Arabia to deliver on G20 commitments.


Priorities for Saudi Arabia
SIN activities in Saudi Arabia are focused on the following priority thematic areas:


  Healthcare and Life Science
  Digital Economy (Artificial Intelligence and Cyber Security)
  Clean and Renewable Energy
  Future/SMART Cities


Our services
The Gulf Science and Innovation Network consist of six officers covering all six Gulf Cooperation Council countries, with the Head of SIN (Gulf) leading from Doha. In Saudi Arabia, SIN is based at both the British Embassy in Riyadh and the British Consulate General in Jeddah. We work closely with DIT, Political and Prosperity teams, as well as with the British Council.

For an introductory brief which covers the local Science and Innovation landscape, UK priorities and activities in Saudi Arabia, please read the UK Science and Innovation Network Country Snapshot.

Opportunities
For information on forthcoming science collaboration events, these are publicised on the Embassy  Facebook page, and we chat about them regularly on Twitter, too. Join us!

Contact us
You can email, or telephone us on: 
Email: SIN.Gulf@fco.gov.uk
Tel: +966 11 481 9293



        
      

      
    Published 12 December 2016
    Last updated 20 August 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 August 2020
              Update August 20-2020
            
            
              19 December 2018
              UK Science and Innovation Network Country Snapshot: Saudi Arabia attachment updated
            
            
              14 May 2018
              Attached new Saudi Arabia Snapshot for 2018.
            
            
              12 December 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Admiralty e-nautical publications
        Seamanship library
        Digitrace: digital notice to mariners
        Digital Application for chart updates - VASCO
        TGT e-data service

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  




      

    World locations

  


        Saudi Arabia

  


  

  


    
  


    