
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Futures Procurement Framework
  

  
  
  
      
    Access support and expertise to help you think about the future.



  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Office for Science

      
      Published
      27 August 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Why use the Framework?

        
        
          Types of service provided

        
        
          Benefits

        
        
          How to contract

        
        
          Useful documents

        
        
          Suppliers and their services

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Futures Procurement Framework consists of 27 suppliers capable of supporting a range of government departments and public bodies (see eligible customers list below) with a variety of services to help them think about the future (‘Futures’).

This Framework is open to departments from February 2020 until 31 January 2023.

Why use the Framework?

Policy decisions made today have long-term consequences. However, the future in which these decisions have an impact is uncertain and making these decisions is difficult. Futures, Foresight and Horizon Scanning help to think strategically about long term opportunities, challenges and actions. This requires resources, collating different perspectives, and knowledgeable experts to guide you through the process. The Framework gives departments (and other public bodies) access to support and guidance for specific projects and for Futures capability building.

Types of service provided


  Services for describing and explaining the characteristics of a policy area (including trend and driver analysis, and systems analysis)
  Services for describing what the future might be like
  Services for developing and testing policies and strategies, and related decisions, particularly for their robustness and resilience
  Services for developing Futures capability within the Civil Service (including skills related to the above activities)
  Services and expertise related to specific fields (including, but not limited to, specific scientific and technological, social and economic fields)


Benefits


  Cost effective support - suppliers have been selected based on the services they provide and their associated cost and quality
  Quick and easy contracting - with up to £50,000 direct purchasing
  Tailored support - to help you make informed decisions
  Large variety of choice - to allow purchasers to find the best fit
  Capability building resources – to boost your teams’ effectiveness
  Fresh perspective – from consultants outside of government


How to contract

For full guidance on how to use this Framework please refer to the customer guidance document below.

Please note from 1 April 2021, the Futures Procurement Framework will be managed by UK SBS. Please send any queries related to framework to the UK SBS Framework Managers at professionalservices@uksbs.co.uk.

The GO-Science Futures Team are able to advise on the use of the framework alongside other internal government contacts and resources. For assistance on project scoping and specification development contact the Futures Team at futures@go-science.gov.uk.

Useful documents


  Futures Framework Agreement (blank template – includes Letter of Appointment, Terms and Conditions, and Order Form) (MS Word Document, 645KB)
  Customer guidance on award procedure (PDF, 248KB, 6 pages)
  Letter of Appointment and Order Form (Part 1) (MS Word Document, 43.8KB)
  Call Off Terms and Conditions (Part 2) (MS Word Document, 163KB)
  List of eligible customers (PDF, 396KB, 13 pages)


If you need these documents in a more accessible format, please email research@uksbs.co.uk.

Suppliers and their services

Below is a list of the suppliers, with links to their prospectuses. Please contact the UK SBS Framework Managers at research@uksbs.co.uk for further information on specialisms, rates and contact details.


  Cranfield University
  Decisions Analysis Services
  Ernst & Young
  Firetail
  Frazer-Nash Consultancy
  Futurescaper
  Frontier Economics
  Global Futures and Foresight
  IfM Engage Ltd
  KPMG
  Market & Opinion Research International (IPSOS MORI)
  Nous Group (UK)
  Outsmart Insight
  Ove Arup & Partners
  Perform Green
  Pye Tait
  RAND Europe
  Risk & Policy Analysts
  RSK Environment
  Sami Consulting
  School of International Futures
  Shaping Tomorrow
  Shared Intelligence
  Trajectory
  UCL Consultants
  Vivid Economics
  Waverley Management Consultants





      
        
    Published 27 August 2020
    Last updated 29 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 June 2021
              Added new email address for SBS who now manage the Futures Procurement Framework.
            
            
              31 March 2021
              From 1 April 2021, the Futures Procurement Framework will be managed by UK SBS.
            
            
              27 August 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Trend Deck Spring 2021
        Trend Deck 2021: Demographics
        Trend Deck 2021: Technology
        Trend Deck 2021: Health
        Futures thinking and foresight: a brief guide

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Funding programmes

  


  

  


    
  


    