
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    DCMS Welsh Language Scheme 2021 - 2025
  

  
  

  
    
  Under the Welsh Language Act 1993 every public body that provides services to the public in Wales has to prepare a scheme outlining how they will deliver these services

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      15 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to Wales


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    DCMS Welsh Language Scheme 2021
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Cynllun Iaith Gymraeg y DCMS 2021
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Under the Welsh Language Act 1993 every public body providing services to the public in Wales has to prepare a scheme setting out how it will provide those services in Welsh.

This scheme describes how we will give effect, so far as is both appropriate in the circumstances and reasonably practicable, to the principle established by the Welsh Language Act that, in the conduct of public business and the administration of justice in Wales, the Welsh and English languages should be treated on a basis of equality.

The scheme covers the services that we provide to the public in Wales. In this scheme, the term public means individuals, legal persons and corporate bodies. It includes the public as a whole, or a section of the public, as well as individual members of the public. The term includes voluntary organisations and charities. Directors and others representing limited companies are also within the meaning of the term ‘public’. It does not, however, include persons who are acting in a capacity which is representative of the Crown, Government or the State. Consequently, persons who fulfil official functions of a public nature, even though they are legal persons, do not come within the meaning of the word ‘public’ when they are fulfilling those official functions.

Further information about the scope and purpose of Welsh language schemes can be found in the Welsh Language Board website.

This scheme was prepared under Section 21 of the Act and in accordance with guidelines issued by the Welsh Language Board under Section 9 of the Act. The revised version of the scheme came into effect on the 26th February 2021.



        
      

      
    Published 15 June 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        CLOSED SME Support: call in Tees Valley (Rolling Call) (OC34R17P 0520)

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Equality

  




      

    World locations

  


        UK and the Commonwealth

  


  

  


    
  


    