
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Claiming Research and Development tax reliefs
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out if you can claim Corporation Tax relief on your Research and Development (R&D) project.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      1 January 2007
      Last updated
      
        20 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Projects that count as R&D


        
        
          Types of R&D relief

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Research and Development (R&D) reliefs support companies that work on innovative projects in science and technology. It can be claimed by a range of companies that seek to research or develop an advance in their field. It can even be claimed on unsuccessful projects.

You may be able to claim Corporation Tax relief if your project meets our definition of R&D.

Projects that count as R&D


The work that qualifies for R&D relief must be part of a specific project to make an advance in science or technology. It cannot be an advance within a social science - like economics - or a theoretical field - such as pure maths.

The project must relate to your company’s trade - either an existing one, or one that you intend to start up based on the results of the R&D.

To get R&D relief you need to explain how a project:


  looked for an advance in science and technology
  had to overcome uncertainty
  tried to overcome this uncertainty
  could not be easily worked out by a professional in the field


Your project may research or develop a new process, product or service  or improve on an existing one.

Advances in the field

Your project must aim to create an advance in the overall field, not just for your business. This means an advance cannot just be an existing technology that has been used for the first time in your sector.

The process, product or service can still be an advance if it’s been developed by another company but is not publicly known or available.

Show that a professional in the field could not work this out

You should explain why a professional could not easily work out your advance.

You can do this by showing that other attempts to find a solution had failed.

You can also show that the people working on your project are professionals in that field and get them to explain the uncertainties involved.

Show there was uncertainty

A scientific or technological uncertainty exists when an expert on the subject cannot say if something is technologically possible or how it can be done - even after referring to all available evidence.

This means that your company or experts in the field cannot already know about the advance or the way you achieved it.

Explain how you tried to overcome the uncertainty

You should show that the R&D needed research, testing and analysis to develop it.

You need to be able to explain the work you did to overcome the uncertainty. This can be a simple description of the successes and failures you had during the project.

Types of R&D relief

There are different types of R&D relief, depending on the size of your company and if the project has been subcontracted to you or not.

Small and medium sized enterprises (SME) R&D Relief

You can claim SME R&D relief if you’re a SME with:


  less than 500 staff
  a turnover of under 100 million euros or a balance sheet total under 86 million euros


You may need to include linked companies and partnerships when you work out if you’re a SME.

SME R&D relief allows companies to:


  deduct an extra 130% of their qualifying costs from their yearly profit, as well as the normal 100% deduction, to make a total 230% deduction
  claim a tax credit if the company is loss making, worth up to 14.5% of the surrenderable loss


Research and Development Expenditure Credit

This replaces the relief previously available under the large company scheme.

Large companies can claim a Research and Development Expenditure Credit (RDEC) for working on R&D projects.

It can also be claimed by SMEs and large companies who have been subcontracted to do R&D work by a large company.

The RDEC is a tax credit, it was 11% of your qualifying R&D expenditure up to 31 December 2017. It was increased to:


  12% from 1 January 2018 to 31 March 2020
  13% from 1 April 2020






      
        
    Published 1 January 2007
    Last updated 20 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 March 2020
              Updated to show the Research and Development Expenditure Credit will increase to 13% of qualifying research and development expenditure from 1 April 2020.
            
            
              1 April 2018
              The guidance has been updated to show new rates for 2018.
            
            
              14 August 2017
              The guidance has been updated to show who can make an amended claim to tax relief for reimbursed expense, and how to make a claim.
            
            
              21 July 2016
              The link free pre-recorded webinar in Further information section has been updated.
            
            
              15 April 2016
              A new pre-recorded webinar for R&D Advance Assurance has been added to this page.
            
            
              6 April 2016
              A new pre-recorded webinar giving an overview on Advance Assurance has been added to this page.
            
            
              23 December 2015
              This guide has been shortened to give overall guidance to R&D tax relief.  Two new guides have been published in addition to give R&D more specific R&D guidance. One is for large company guidance and the other for small to medium enterprises.
            
            
              30 November 2015
              This guidance has been updated to include information about R&D Advance Assurance.
            
            
              1 January 2007
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Research and Development tax relief for small and medium-sized enterprises
        Claim Research and Development (R&D) expenditure credit
        Research and Development tax relief: Advance Assurance
        Corporate Intangibles Research and Development Manual
        Apply for Advance Assurance for Research and Development tax relief
        Corporation Tax rates and reliefs

  




      

    Collection

  


        Research and Development tax relief

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporation Tax

  


  

  


    
  


    