

Explores the implications and applications of blockchain, the technology underpinning contentious cryptocurrencies.




Read Online

How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Blockchain
Implications and Applications of Blockchain
by Pavan Katkar
Related Topics: Banking and Financial Services, Cybersecurity, Law Enforcement, Science and Technology Legislation
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.6 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










The technology underpinning contentious cryptocurrencies (like bitcoin) is widely known as blockchain. This dissertation explored the implications and applications of blockchain. By "implications" I mean what kinds of policy problems is it enabling, and by "applications" I mean what kinds of policy problems can we address using blockchain.
The first part of this dissertation explored some of the widely discussed policy problems associated with blockchain to find out that blockchain is not creating any new kinds of policy problems. However, it has the potential to scale up some specific law enforcement issues associated with transaction of illicit goods and services.
The second part of this dissertation conceptualizes a blockchain based ecosystem to demonstrate that this tool can be used in orchestrating an ecosystem geared towards mitigating large scale (n » 1) cyber attacks. This exploration led to the insight that if addressing a policy issue requires the alignment of economic incentives of multiple independent entities in a cooperative way, then blockchain can be quite an effective tool for that purpose.
Based on these analyses, this dissertation suggests that while blockchain (and cryptocurrencies) may be increasing the scale of some select law enforcement issues, there is no need for new policies as such; existing policies are robust enough to address those issues. Secondly, governmental and commercial organizations may benefit by exploring how to apply this tool in addressing complex policy problems that need coordination of multiple independent entities.

Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction

Chapter Two
Introduction to Blockchain

Chapter Three
Intermediaries

Chapter Four
Blockchain-Created Value

Chapter Five
Selected Policy Considerations

Chapter Six
A Potential Application of Blockchain

Chapter Seven
A Blockchained Ecosystem

Chapter Eight
Concluding Thoughts




Research conducted by

Pardee RAND Graduate School



This document was submitted as a dissertation in May August in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the doctoral degree in public policy analysis at the Pardee RAND Graduate School. The faculty committee that supervised and approved the dissertation consisted of C. Richard Neu (Chair), Angela O'Mahony, and Philip Evans.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Dissertation series. Pardee RAND dissertations are produced by graduate fellows of the Pardee RAND Graduate School, the world's leading producer of Ph.D.'s in policy analysis. The dissertations are supervised, reviewed, and approved by a Pardee RAND faculty committee overseeing each dissertation.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: AuthorPublisher: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 147
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RGSDA1084-1
Document Number: RGSD-A1084-1
Year: 2021
Series: Dissertations



Explore
Related Topics

Banking and Financial ServicesCybersecurityLaw EnforcementScience and Technology Legislation

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Katkar, Pavan, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Blockchain: Implications and Applications of Blockchain. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSDA1084-1.html.
Katkar, Pavan, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Blockchain: Implications and Applications of Blockchain, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RGSD-A1084-1, 2021. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSDA1084-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



