
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Funding for innovation in renewable energy
  

  
  
  
      
  Government funding for innovation in renewable energy.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      25 January 2017
      Last updated
      
        6 March 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Renewable energy innovation

        
        
          Joint collaborations to reduce the cost of renewables

        
        
          Offshore wind innovation hub

        
        
          Windfarm mitigation for UK air defence

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Renewable energy innovation

Government is investing in renewable energy innovation to bring the cost of technologies down. This includes around £177 million in investments from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), Innovate UK, and the Research Councils.

As part of this commitment, within the BEIS Energy Innovation Programme, BEIS expects to invest around £15 million in the renewables innovation theme.

Joint collaborations to reduce the cost of renewables

The UK is working with other countries to develop shared solutions to reducing the cost of renewable energy technologies. This includes UK investments through the European Research Area Network (ERAnet) of around £700,000 in bioenergy demonstration projects and up to £8 million in the ‘DemoWind’ programme to reduce the cost of offshore wind technologies.

Offshore wind innovation hub

Building on the UK’s unique expertise in the offshore wind industry, BEIS is investing up to £1.3 million in a new offshore wind innovation hub, to be delivered by the Offshore Renewable Energy Catapult and the Knowledge Transfer Network. The Hub will bring industry together to innovate and reduce the cost of energy from offshore wind.

The hub’s first programme will be the Offshore Wind Innovation Exchange. This cross-sector initiative will accelerate the cost reduction of energy from offshore wind by matching industry challenges with innovative solutions adopted from other parts of the economy, to provide new opportunities for UK businesses.

Windfarm mitigation for UK air defence

Funded by the BEIS Energy Innovation Programme, the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals that can provide future offshore windfarm mitigation for UK Air Defence surveillance; including alternative technologies that could fill or remove gaps in radar coverage.

DASA is leading the work on behalf of BEIS, the Royal Air Force, and the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl).

Up to £2 million is available, intended to fund a number of contracts up to £500,000.

Further detail and information is available on the competition page.





      
        
    Published 25 January 2017
    Last updated 6 March 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 March 2020
              Added information about the Windfarm mitigation for UK air defence competition.
            
            
              12 October 2017
              Updates from Clean Growth Strategy.
            
            
              25 January 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence
        Funding for innovative smart energy systems
        Clean Growth Fund
        Energy Innovation
        Competition: Windfarm Mitigation for UK Air Defence Phase 2

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon technologies
        Research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    