
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Land Cyber Programme
  

  
  
  
      
  The Land Cyber Programme aims to integrate people with cyber and electromagnetic technologies, to exploit opportunities and gain military advantage. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      5 February 2021
      Last updated
      
        23 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Land Cyber Vision

        
        
          Programme Benefits

        
        
          Land Cyber Priorities

        
        
          How to find out more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Land Cyber Vision

An army within the Joint Force and with Allies, naturalised to the cyber and electromagnetic domain, which integrates people with technology to exploit opportunities and gain military advantage.

Watch the Land Cyber Programme animation.



Programme Benefits

We seek to modernise and then transform.  A secure Army Digital Enterprise and a talented digital workforce provide the foundation to protect us against hostile, invisible threats.  By developing new skills and leveraging new technologies we will maximise the talent within the army, leading to a resilient and adaptable force with greater agility to quickly adapt to new threats, and to lever cyber and electromagnetic capabilities to exploit opportunities.

We seek to enhance foresight and reduce the cognitive burden of command, by improving the speed and accuracy of our data and signals intelligence we will be able to make better and faster decisions.  We will constrain the adversary’s freedom of action by integrating cyber and electronic attacks with other physical and joint effects, as the threat dictates; preserving our survivability and increasing the army’s wider utility for multi Domain Integration.  It is through a powerful combination of a collaborative approach with defence, our partners and our allies, and enablers and frameworks that we will modernise and integrate with the army’s other major programmes, and their visions.

Land Cyber Priorities

To offer electronic and cyber protection to operate in a hostile cyber and electromagnetic domain.  To deepen our understanding, using enhanced electronic sensors and survey tools and by better contributing to the collection and exploitation of national intelligence.  To develop electromagnetic and cyber effect capable of deceiving, denying, disrupting and degrading the key capabilities of our adversaries, on land or in the cyber and electromagnetic domain.

How to find out more

Contact the Land Cyber stakeholder engagement: ArmyInfo-Land-Cyber-Prog-Admin@mod.gov.uk.

Related links

LE TacCIS Programme





      
        
    Published 5 February 2021
    Last updated 23 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 February 2021
              Added animation and infographic.
            
            
              5 February 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces

  


  

  


    
  


    