The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed supply-chain vulnerabilities across industries—from food and beverage to computers and electronics. While the acute shock created by the pandemic put supply-chain disruption on newspapers’ front pages and resilience on the CEO agenda, the reality is shocks have been growing more frequent and severe well before the crisis hit.Our recent research, , found that disruptions lasting a month or longer now occur an average of once every 3.7 years. The financial toll associated with the most extreme events has also been climbing; on average, companies can expect to lose more than 40 percent of a year’s profits every decade.In this context, procurement functions have a dual imperative: . With the typical playbook no longer fit for purpose, seven investment priorities can help procurement functions rise to the challenge—while building a competitive edge and boosting company performance.COVID-19 caught the procurement functions of many companies unprepared, revealing larger-than-expected risks due to overreliance on sole-source procurement and geographically concentrated suppliers. Nevertheless, many have been quick to respond to the challenges posed by the pandemic, acting with purpose, speed, and agility to source new suppliers.The challenge now is not only to diversify—that’s just a tactical reaction—but to build a risk-based approach to procurement in order to prepare for the inevitable next shock.One proven method companies across a range of industries have successfully adopted is the implementation of  (RCTs), led by the chief procurement officer (CPO) (Exhibit 1). RCT task forces can play an important role in building resilience. Typically installed for a period of three to six months, they convene daily or weekly meetings to review high-risk suppliers, approve or reject mitigation requests, and track the implementation of detailed risk-mitigation plans. Many companies go further and embed the RCT concept into their daily operations.Creating a risk-monitoring dashboard is one critical component of establishing an RCT. This can help companies understand where their own risks may exist, and achieve greater visibility into those of their suppliers and their suppliers’ suppliers—in many cases leveraging digital tools that enable supplier-buyer collaboration to map the supply-chain risks from end to end. This transparency enables procurement functions to assess the potential impact of shocks and respond with agility by tapping alternative sources of supply more quickly.As companies look to reduce costs, many of the usual levers they previously had at their disposal are no longer available. Reducing costs from suppliers may become more difficult as it could significantly harm the suppliers’ operational viability, or damage longstanding relationships in the context of the current crisis. It’s no longer enough to rely on the typical cost-reduction toolkit, leaving procurement functions with a constraint-based response. They will need to find win-win solutions that enable them—and their suppliers—to weather the storm.Our  across multiple sectors showed that companies that regularly collaborate with their suppliers can achieve higher growth, lower operating costs, and greater profitability than their industry peers.The three levers that companies can use instead include:These are opportunities procurement functions can seize in order to protect margins and emerge from the pandemic stronger.Beyond these initial cost-reduction actions, companies can also look to the future and invest in creating resilient procurement functions in anticipation of further shocks ahead. As our recent  revealed, many companies still focus their efforts reactively, preparing for the types of disruptions and catastrophes they have encountered in the past rather than planning proactively.However, by investing across seven key areas, companies can build resilient procurement functions that are prepared to respond to a range of events—including those they might not anticipate today.Collectively, these investment priorities can help companies develop procurement functions that can respond effectively to shocks and deliver significant performance benefits.Procurement has a tangible, measurable impact on companies’ performance. The global financial crisis revealed that these companies were not only able to manage costs down, but were most proactive in preparing for recovery, which improved their valuation as they emerged from the crisis. They didn’t simply wait for opportunity to come their way—they had a through-cycle mindset and acted decisively.