
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apply for funding: space ideas, community and educational
  

  
  
  
      
  Details on funding for programmes run with the space sector, academic, education and community partners.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      30 April 2014
      Last updated
      
        26 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Horizon 2020

        
        
          International Partnership Programme

        
        
          National Space Technology Programme (NSTP)

        
        
          National Space Innovation Programme (NSIP)

        
        
          Space Exploration - Aurora

        
        
          Space for Smarter Government Programme (SSGP)

        
        
          Space Placements in INdustry

        
        
          Statement of interest to outline a new project

        
        
          Student support: ESA microgravity programmes

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Horizon 2020

Horizon 2020 (H2020) is the successor programme to the EU FP7 programme and is the EU’s main instrument for the funding of research and innovation in science, engineering and technology.

H2020 support in the UK

Find out the latest information about H2020 in the UK following EU Exit.

International Partnership Programme

The International Partnership Programme (IPP) is a >£150M initiative run by the UK Space Agency, which utilises the UK space sector’s research and innovation strengths to deliver sustainable economic, societal or environmental benefits to emerging and developing economies around the world.

It is part of, and funded from, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy’s (BEIS) Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF): a £1.5 billion fund announced by the UK Government, which supports cutting-edge research and innovation on global issues affecting developing countries. The GCRF forms part of the UK’s Official Development Assistance (ODA) commitment.

IPP seeks to use satellite data solutions to make a positive and practical impact on the lives of those living in emerging and developing economies through partnerships with end users in the target countries to increase their capacity to respond to specific challenges.

Find out more about the International Partnership Programme.

National Space Technology Programme (NSTP)

The National Space Technology Programme encourages the development of space technology in the UK space sector. The programme offers support by funding industry, academia and other (not for profit) government institutions, who are looking to develop technology and build new capabilities for the UK Space sector.

National Space Innovation Programme (NSIP)

The NSIP is the UK Space Agency’s programme to support the development of innovative products, services and technologies that have application in the space sector.

Read more about NSIP

The latest call for funding closed in September 2020.

Space Exploration - Aurora

Aurora programme

The UK Space Agency is responsible for the national Aurora programme, previously funded by the Science and Technology Facilities Council. The programme funds both industry and academia in the fields of planetary science, astrobiology, space instrumentation and the development of new technologies to exploit the opportunities of space missions.

This programme consists of the following elements.

Aurora science - national funding is available for science related to the Aurora space exploration programme.

Aurora outreach - national funding for outreach opportunities related to the Aurora space exploration programme.

Space for Smarter Government Programme (SSGP)

Enabling the public sector to save money, innovate and make more effective policy decisions by using space technology and data.

Call for proposals

We welcome expressions of interest for projects that help the public sector take steps towards making satellite data products and services part of routine operational use. The SSGP ambition is to help the public sector create sustainable operational services from satellite data and products to enable smarter, more efficient operations, reduce risk and enhance policy making.

The call:


  is open to any organisation inc public sector, academic and commercial companies
  could be used to build a business case, host workshops, reduce risk, demonstrate ideas
  could be used to help leverage monies from other sources or be part of a bigger programme
  should cover use of one or more of Earth Observation, Satellite Communications, Position, Navigation and Timing by one or more public sector end users


Full details and criteria can be found on the SSGP website.

Space Placements in INdustry

Applications for the 2021 SPIN scheme are now closed.

Find out more and apply.

Statement of interest to outline a new project

The UK Space Agency funds new space science and exploration projects. To begin this process, statements of interest should be sent directly to the UK Space Agency.

The SOI process and peer review of projects

As appropriate, the UK Space Agency Science Programme Advisory Committee (SPAC) and Aurora Advisory Committee (AurAC) will review statements of interest. The UK Space Agency will then provide feedback to applicants on whether or not a full proposal shall be invited. The Science and Technology Facilities Council science committee also provides scientific advice to the Agency.

How to make an application

If you have an ‘ad hoc’ idea, ask the agency first, then complete an SOI and submit it and an adviser from the UK Space Agency will review it.

Before submitting any new proposal, the applicant must liaise with an Agency Space Science or Exploration Programme Manager. The Programme Manager will decide if the applicants are required to submit an SOI and provide advice on the timing of a submission.

Either SPAC or AurAC will consider the SOI and recommend if a full proposal should be invited for consideration by the space agency peer review panel.

Application information


  
      
  
  
    Form: Statement of Interest in future major project
    
        MS Word Document, 108KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  
      
  
  
    Assessment criteria: Science Programme Advisory Committee
    
        MS Word Document, 61.1KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


Student support: ESA microgravity programmes

This announcement of opportunity offers up to £5,000 (if available) to support students participating in ESA microgravity programmes.

The call is open until further notice.


  
      
  
  
    Announcement of opportunity: support for Student Teams selected for ESA Microgravity programmes
    
        ODT, 17.2KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  






      
        
    Published 30 April 2014
    Last updated 26 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 March 2021
              Updated information.
            
            
              1 March 2019
              New announcement of opportunity added. Funding support for students selected for ESA microgravity programmes.
            
            
              18 January 2019
              Space Placements in Industry (SPIN) funding opportunity added.
            
            
              19 December 2018
              Page updated to reflect new space for all grant call.
            
            
              19 December 2018
              Dated content removed and updated with a link to the latest Space for All grant call.
            
            
              20 December 2017
              Calls for proposals are no longer available
            
            
              3 November 2017
              The 2018 space call in Horizon 2020 has been published. Information added to page.
            
            
              23 March 2017
              Case study document attached
            
            
              14 September 2016
              Space for All guidance updated
            
            
              14 September 2016
              IPP Finance Form added
            
            
              1 September 2016
              National Space Technology Programme announcement of opportunity published.
            
            
              20 July 2016
              Attachments inserted
            
            
              14 October 2015
              Space for All community grant scheme updated. New round of funding announced.
            
            
              29 July 2015
              Update to National Space Technology Programme funding information.
            
            
              28 August 2014
              International Space University (ISU) – Scholarship Scheme information added.
            
            
              22 August 2014
              Space for Smarter Government Programme call for proposals information added.
            
            
              13 August 2014
              Space for All small awards scheme documents updated.
            
            
              30 July 2014
              National Space Technology Programme funding round two, call for space technology proposals information added.
            
            
              4 July 2014
              Announcement of the second round of the National Space Technology Programme funding added.
            
            
              27 June 2014
              Aurora outreach announcement of opportunity, guidance and application form.
            
            
              30 April 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        National Space Innovation Programme (NSIP)
        National Space Technology Programme
        UK space missions: case studies and programmes
        Space Placements in Industry (SPIN): Award scheme 2021
        Call for applications: National Space Innovation Programme (NSIP)

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Spaceflight legislation and guidance

  




      

    Collection

  


        Space Science Programme

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Space

  


  

  


    
  


    