What does it mean to pursue a career in STEM?  What job opportunities are available to those with STEM degrees? What classes should you take in high school and college to become a mechanical engineer? What does a typical day look like for a scientist, engineer, or technician?On Wednesday, April 21, from 6:00 to 8:00 p.m. Central Time, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory will offer high school students an opportunity to ask those questions at the annual Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Career Expo, held online using the GatherTown conference platform.  The Expo provides a valuable opportunity for high school students to meet with STEM professionals from a wide variety of careers and ask questions of the people actually doing the jobs they will be applying for in the coming years.In addition to Fermilab scientists, engineers, computing professionals, and technicians, the STEM Career Expo will feature professionals from local companies and research organizations who will be available to explain what they do. This is a chance for students to talk one-on-one with professionals working in their fields of interest. The expo will also include three panel discussions on STEM-related topics, with an opportunity for students to ask questions. The virtual platform provides students the additional opportunity to take virtual tours of Fermilab sites not typically available during the in-person event.“Our goal is to show students the vast professional possibilities available when pursuing a career in STEM. By partnering with a wide variety of organizations in the Chicagoland area, we hope to give students a chance to see first hand a large number of exciting opportunities,” Amanda Early, education program leader at Fermilab, stated.The STEM Career Expo is free and open to all high school students. The expo is a collaborative event organized by the Fermilab Office of Education and Public Engagement and educators and career specialists from area schools.For more information and to register, please visit the .  Registration deadline is 3:00 PM Central Time the day of the event. 