 – – The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) today announced funding for three domestic projects that will accelerate advanced nuclear technology development. These projects, valued at $26.9 million including industry cost-share contributions, will allow industry-led teams to advance the state of domestic commercial nuclear capability.Two awards will advance flexible operation of light-water reactors with integrated hydrogen production systems. The third will leverage the modeling and simulation capabilities developed from the DOE Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation (NEAMS) program and Energy Innovation Hub for Modeling & Simulation (Hub).The awards are through the Office of Nuclear Energy’s (NE) funding opportunity announcement (FOA) , in collaboration with the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy’s (EERE) Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office for the hydrogen-related selections. Subsequent application reviews and selection processes will be conducted through December 2022, as supported by Congressional appropriations.“These awards continue to demonstrate DOE’s commitment to accelerating U.S. advanced nuclear technology via private-public partnerships with our industry partners and national laboratories,” said Dr. Rita Baranwal, Assistant Secretary for the Office of Nuclear Energy. “They truly showcase DOE’s all-of-the-above energy strategy.” “We are excited to continue our partnership with the Office of Nuclear Energy,” said Daniel R Simmons, Assistant Secretary for the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. “After several years of working together, it will be valuable to see these real-world demonstration projects produce hydrogen and enable the integration of nuclear power with renewables.”The solicitation is broken into three funding pathways:The following projects were selected under the Advanced Reactor Development Projects pathway:The following project was selected under the Regulatory Assistance Grants pathway:NE funds research, development, and demonstration projects to reduce the risk and cost of advanced nuclear technologies, and to improve nuclear energy’s contribution to meeting the nation’s economic, energy security, and environmental challenges. More information on the Office of Nuclear Energy and previous funding announcements can be found .###