
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Science and Innovation Network Snapshot – Taiwan
  

  
  

  
    
  An introductory brief from the UK Science and Innovation Network which covers the local Science and Innovation landscape, UK priorities and successes in Taiwan.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office

      
      Published
      7 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        17 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    UK Science and Innovation Network Snapshot – Taiwan
    
        PDF, 787KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Science and Innovation Network Snapshot for Taiwan provides information on the local Science and Innovation landscape, UK priorities and successes, on just two pages. They offer a snapshot of information under the headings: Science & Innovation Landscape; UK Science & Innovation, and Science and Innovation Network recent success stories and future activities. There is also a list of Science and Innovation Network contacts for further enquiries.



        
      

      
    Published 7 November 2017
    Last updated 17 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 September 2020
              To update the UK Science and Innovation Network Snapshot – Taiwan
            
            
              10 July 2018
              Updated the snapshot attachment
            
            
              7 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  




      

    World locations

  


        Taiwan

  


  

  


    
  


    