
	
Welcome to the December edition of Voices on Infrastructure, tackling how we improve project development and delivery at this critical juncture.Extraordinary infrastructure stimulus accompanied by net-zero climate targets have presented both significant opportunities and challenges in regard to how we develop and deliver major projects. Although the funds may have been allocated, the systems to deliver these projects may struggle even to handle the anticipated increase in capacity and pace—let alone the new sustainability and resilience criteria. News from the Global Infrastructure This edition of Voices will share perspectives on what it will take to redefine project success: developing new funding models, streamlining the approval process, incorporating new sustainability and equity criteria, and building the internal capabilities to deliver.At the recent 2021 UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) meetings in Glasgow, McKinsey hosted  on driving the difference. The Global Infrastructure Initiative (GII) supported a number of sessions on transport, the built environment, and sustainable cities. At these sessions, participants identified the key themes and initiatives on which leaders could collaborate to drive progress. You can read insights from previous events and see our forthcoming roundtables .
		
	
We are excited to announce the first of our GII partners for our , which will take place in Tokyo from October 19 to 21, 2022. We warmly welcome our pillar partners, Ashurst, Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec (CDPQ), Spencer Stuart, and Trimble, as well as our institutional partner, the Global Infrastructure Investor Association. We are excited to work with these organizations to help shape the global infrastructure agenda over the next year. For more details on our summit, roundtables, site visits, and Voices publications, please visit our .We hope you enjoy this issue, and we welcome your thoughts on how GII can continue to be a catalyst for driving change toward sustainable infrastructure. If you have comments or would like to subscribe a colleague to Voices, please contact us at .

	




    
    

