

The RAND Blog
Previous Blog PostImplementing Arab Gulf ReconciliationNext Blog PostUnderstanding Our Culture of Health Before the Pandemic Can Help Us Improve It Afterward

Prescription Drug Prices, Transgender Troops, Space Diplomacy: RAND Weekly Recap
blog




January 29, 2021


We discuss of U.S. prescription drug prices compared to those in other countries; the implications of allowing transgender troops in the military; food insecurity during the pandemic; risks posed by of the Internet of Bodies; the history of attacks on Western diplomatic facilities; and how the Biden administration can galvanize space diplomacy.Photo by George Frey/Reuters
U.S. Prescription Drug Prices Are Much Higher Than Those in Other Countries
Prescription drug prices in the United States are, on average, 2.56 times those in 32 other countries. That's according to a new RAND report.
Brand-name drugs are the primary driver of America's higher prescription drug prices: For branded drugs, U.S. prices averaged 3.44 times those in other nations. Prices for generic drugs, on the other hand, are slightly lower in the United States than in most other countries.
Transparency about prices may help address the problem of rising U.S. prescription drug spending, which is estimated to account for more than 10 percent of the country's total health care spending.Soldiers patrol near Multinational Base Tirin Kot, Uruzgan province, Afghanistan, November 6, 2013
Photo by Cpl. Mark Doran/Australian Defense Force
Allowing Transgender Troops to Serve in the Military
On Monday, President Biden signed an executive order reversing a policy that banned transgender people from serving in the U.S. military. A RAND report published in 2016 examined the implications of allowing transgender personnel to serve openly. Its key takeaway: The effect on military readiness and health care costs is likely to be small.Photo by Igor Alecsander/Getty Images
Food Insecurity: How the Pandemic Magnifies Racial Disparities
Since 2011, RAND researchers have been working to understand how diet, access to food, and other factors affect the health and well-being of residents of two low-income, predominantly Black neighborhoods in Pittsburgh. Food insecurity had been falling in these communities over the last decade. But COVID-19 erased much of that progress. Food insecurity increased by nearly 80 percent in the first weeks of the pandemic. This far outpaces food insecurity observed among the general U.S. population during the same period.Image by peterschreiber.media/Adobe Stock
Are We Ready for the Internet of Bodies?
Artificial pancreases that can help diabetics manage their blood-sugar levels. Brain implants that allow amputees to control their prosthetic limbs. Smart stents that can monitor for blood clots. Internet of Bodies devices could revolutionize the health care system. But according to a RAND study, there are serious privacy, security, and ethical concerns to consider, too.Protesters destroy an American flag pulled down from the U.S. embassy in Cairo, September 11, 2012
Photo by Mohamed Abd El Ghany/Reuters
The History of Attacks on Western Diplomatic Facilities
As the most visible symbols of Western governments and their policies, U.S. and allied diplomatic facilities like embassies and consulates are frequent targets of violence. To learn more about the threats to these facilities and how to prevent them, RAND researchers reviewed data on all attacks from 1979 to 2019. Notably, they found that the majority of past attacks culminated—that is, reached a point at which response forces would no longer make a difference—in two hours or less.Photo by DKosig/Getty Images
How Biden Can Galvanize Space Diplomacy
With governments developing weapons for use in space and commercial space activity on the rise, there's a growing risk of extra-terrestrial conflict. According to RAND experts, the Biden administration has an opportunity to enhance safety and security in space by establishing norms for responsible behavior. These norms could range from informal rules of the road to legally binding international agreements.Listen to the Recap



Get Weekly Updates from RAND
If you enjoyed this weekly recap, consider subscribing to Policy Currents, our newsletter and podcast.



Stay InformedRAND Policy Currents
EmailSign Up



Subscribe to the podcast.




Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Topics
 Black Populations
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Counterterrorism
Food Supply
Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Populations
Health Information Privacy
Military Personnel
Pandemic
Pharmaceutical Drugs
Security Cooperation
Space Science and Technology
United States



Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




 Related Resources 









Report
International Prescription Drug Price Comparisons

Jan 28, 2021
Andrew W. Mulcahy, Christopher M. Whaley @cm_whaley, et al.










Report
Assessing the Implications of Allowing Transgender Personnel to Serve Openly

Jun 30, 2016
Agnes Gereben Schaefer, Radha Iyengar Plumb, et al.










News Release
Food Insecurity Spiked in Two African American Neighborhoods During Early Months of Pandemic

Jan 21, 2021










Essay
Are We Ready for the Internet of Bodies?

Jan 8, 2021










Report
Seizures of Western Diplomatic Facilities

Jan 25, 2021
Jacqueline Gardner Burns, Christopher A. Mouton, et al.










Commentary
How Joe Biden Can Galvanize Space Diplomacy

Jan 15, 2021
Stephen J. Flanagan, Bruce McClintock @BHMcClintock








