
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Example lessons for remote teaching
  

  
  

  
    
  Lesson plans shared by schools to help teachers adapt their practice for remote education following the outbreak of coronavirus (COVID-19).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      26 October 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson examples: key stage 2 science
    
        PDF, 171KB, 7 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson example: key stage 3 maths
    
        PDF, 338KB, 12 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson example: key stage 3 music
    
        PDF, 133KB, 6 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson example: key stage 3 religious education
    
        PDF, 175KB, 14 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson example: key stage 4 chemistry
    
        PDF, 226KB, 11 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson example: key stage 4 English literature
    
        PDF, 197KB, 8 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Remote education lesson example: key stage 4 Spanish
    
        PDF, 210KB, 10 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Department for Education (DfE) is working with schools to understand how they are adapting their teaching practice for remote education. Schools have shared a range of lesson plans annotated with tips and ideas they have found useful when teaching remotely.

The purpose of the lesson plans is to help teachers consider how they might adapt their teaching practice for the remote context.


The examples are intended as a source of ideas, not as teaching resources or lessons the department expects schools to teach. They do not reflect departmental endorsement of any particular approach to remote teaching.



The department does not expect teachers to create formal lesson plans.


Remote teaching webinars

Some of the schools that created the lesson plans have run webinars that discuss their approach to remote teaching in more depth. They explore remote teaching strategies and techniques using examples from science lessons (primary) and music and modern foreign languages lessons (secondary).

These webinars took place live on 6 and 8 October 2020, with questions from the audience. You can watch the recordings on the DfE YouTube channel:


  Remote education for secondary school teachers, United Learning
  Remote education for primary school teachers, United Learning



You can view the full range of webinars for remote education offered by DfE.




        
      

      
    Published 26 October 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        School curriculum and teaching during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    