
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Technical qualifications within T Levels
  

  
  
  
      
  Information on how Ofqual is regulating the technical qualification component of T Levels. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ofqual, Department for Education, and Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education

      
      Published
      31 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        19 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          What is a Technical Qualification within a T Level?

        
        
          Timeline

        
        
          Supporting information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


What is a Technical Qualification within a T Level?

Technical Qualifications are a compulsory element of the new T Level courses. Each technical qualification includes:


  the core theory, concepts and skills for an industry area
  specialist skills and knowledge for an occupation or career


Other elements of T Levels courses are:


  an industry placement with an employer (not regulated by Ofqual)
  a Level 2 in maths and English (if students have not already achieved them)
  other occupation-specific requirements if they are essential for skilled employment e.g. licence to practice qualifications or professional registration


Visit the Department for Education’s website for more information on the introduction of T Levels.

Ofqual is responsible for regulating Technical Qualifications within T Levels. We’ve introduced specific new rules for Technical Qualifications. As with all other qualifications we regulate, we work to secure consistent and reliable assessments and to ensure fairness for all learners.

This includes means making sure that:


  assessments cover the expected content, and are clear and error-free
  marking is completed on time and is of high quality
  grade boundaries are set fairly to reflect the demand of the paper
  qualifications are designed so that they are accessible to the full range of learners who will take them
  requirements are clear to all teachers and trainers
  we deal with any malpractice that might give some students an unfair advantage over others
  we take account of any serious disruption or other events which might affect individual performances on the day of assessment
  we balance all these difference aspects of fairness so that learners, parents, teachers, tutors, trainers, employers and universities can be confident in results


The first 3 Technical Qualifications were accredited by Ofqual and approved by the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education in April 2020, for first teaching in September 2020. Ofqual has now accredited and the Institute has approved a further 7 Technical Qualifications for first teaching in September 2021.

The outline qualification content is available from the Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education.

For queries on the outline content, please contact the Institute at enquiries.ifa@education.gov.uk or institute.media@education.gov.uk for press enquiries.

Timeline

September 2020

First teaching for the initial 3 Technical Qualifications as T Level courses is scheduled to start in specific occupations across 3 industries:


  digital production, design and development (digital industry)
  design, surveying and planning (construction industry)
  education (education and childcare industry)


September 2021

First teaching for a further 7 Technical Qualifications as T Level courses is scheduled to start in the following subject areas:


  building services engineering
  digital business services
  digital support and services
  health
  healthcare science
  onsite construction
  science


Supporting information

The following additional information may be of interest:


  
support is available for providers of T Levels from the Education and Training Foundation.
  the Department for Education’s industry placement team can be contacted at tlevel.placement@education.gov.uk.
  
information about the new T Level study programmes from the Department of Education.
  Department for Education’s T Level action plan, showing progress in the development of T Levels.
  information about how industry placements for T Levels work and how employers can get involved.
  ESFA’s list of providers selected to deliver T Levels and providers planning to deliver the T Level transition programme.





      
        
    Published 31 October 2019
    Last updated 19 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 April 2021
              Updated the number of approved Technical Qualifications and fixing a broken link
            
            
              21 December 2020
              Update regarding approval of Technical Qualifications for first teaching from September 2021.
            
            
              9 April 2020
              Updated to show that the first 3 T levels have been accredited by Ofqual and approved by the IfATE for teaching from September 2020.
            
            
              31 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        T levels

  


  

  


    
  


    