Core transaction processing engines for banks—or “core banking systems”—have been making news in the world of banking technology of late. Some of the major global banks have announced partnerships with new cloud-based core banking systems providers. There have been a few instances in the US of these partnerships as well. Many small and midcap banks in the US and Latin America are known to be shopping around for new cores. This topic seems to have suddenly gained visibility in the US and the rest of the world In this article we look at the forces that are raising the core banking profile, and at the alternatives available to banking leaders as they consider their technology roadmap. Banks all over the world spend millions of dollars each on maintaining their core banking systems, which usually interface with tens or hundreds of systems. Core banking systems handle a high volume of transactions and are expected to function without interruption—prolonged outages can invite regulatory scrutiny, customer opprobrium, and significant loss of revenue.Legacy core banking systems have traditionally succeeded in terms of reliability. Failures are rare, with some banks going without an outage for months, if not years. However, with the advent of digital banking, cloud, and APIs, banks have seen a significant shift in the way banking products and partnerships are constructed. Banks are now expected to process transactions in real time, be able to stitch together partnerships with fintech companies in a matter of weeks, release new features frequently, be able to scale (up and down) their infrastructure needs at will, and even execute on M&A quickly. Older core banking systems— usually designed for reliability rather than open architecture—may need to respond to this new requirement, which, to their credit, many are doing with alacrity. In addition to the existential issues listed above, banks endure some tactical day-to-day pain points with legacy core banking systems. These problems vary from bank to bank, but include a dwindling engineering talent pool, excessive undocumented customization leading to a complex code base that can be difficult and risky to change, and various vendor-support issues.In response to these issues, a new breed of core banking systems has emerged in the last few years. They are, or will be, cloud-ready and open-banking compliant, and, in some cases, have very advanced architectures that make frequent feature releases easier. Some of these systems are also pushing the envelope in customer experience and offering innovative and reasonable pricing schemes for core banking replacements. More importantly, they claim not to compromise on the core tenet of faultless transaction processing. Most banking leaders are aware of the significance of their core banking system, but many do not have explicit strategies tied to the core. And as banking continues to be disrupted, the traditional core architecture may not be able to deliver for incumbent banks; and given the long lead times required for transitioning to a new core, they need to set their strategies in motion now.The best place to begin this effort is by answering five questions: Another set of simple questions can give decision-makers a sense of the urgency of their core system problem (Exhibit 1). Affirmative answers to more than two of the questions indicate a potential problem and merit further intervention.It is important to carry out this exercise dispassionately and in a business-risk focused manner. This does not mean taking a myopic view of the problem. If a bank believes that there are no problems now, but there could be in the future, then preparing for an intervention now may make sense. It is common for core banking projects to take two to three years to complete, so the assessment should be made considering a medium-term horizon. Contrary to popular opinion, a “rip-and-replace” is not the only possible intervention—and often it is often actually not the right choice. Depending on the urgency, several responses are possible, ranging from small tactical changes to large-scale re-architecture. Measures like this can extend the life of a core banking system by as long as five to ten years, which is especially valuable for banks that lack the capital to install a new core banking system, have other near-term priorities, or want to wait until more advanced offerings come to market. Many banks have used these measures (popularly known as “hollowing out”) to extend the service life of their core banking system by many years, with a lot of success, and more importantly without slowing down their “digital” journeys.Exhibit 2 shows a (non-exhaustive) range of options available for extending the effective life of a core banking system. It is important to remember that these are at best medium-term measures.There are two main options (with a few variations) for banks that conclude that they need to replace their core banking system: a and a .Most current implementations are still of the traditional variety. But we are seeing an increase in banks of all sizes putting off traditional core implementations with the aim of experimenting with next-gen systems. There is some evidence to suggest that banks will try and shift en masse to a cloud-based microservice architecture in the next few years. The core method of communication between machines will be APIs. Armed with a micro-service based architecture, the new core banking applications will become core enablers of the shift to this architecture. Traditional core banking providers have become aware of the need and potential inherent in a cloud-based microservice architecture; banking leaders should keep a close watch on developments here. We also expect to see some M&A activity between traditional and next-gen core banking system providers.For now, there are four primary issues that prevent banks from replacing their core applications with next-generation core banking applications.Whatever option is chosen, an initiative like core banking transformation requires a solid business case. This is not a trivial exercise: a core banking transformation is akin to replacing the foundation of a building, and is therefore not always amenable to a straightforward revenue-based business case. Traditional core banking replacements have tried to make their case by adding in cost-saving elements through process automation and clean-ups, but it has proven very difficult to pay for a core banking transformation purely through efficiencies. Next-generation core banking systems may present some additional advantages in making a business case because of their architecture and business model. Some examples: The next steps for any bank depend, naturally, upon the context. For some banks, the core system is an urgent priority; for others less so. Some banks have an appetite for experimentation, while others prefer to be followers and wait for other incumbents to pioneer a new core banking system. In general, we expect that core banking implementations will become cheaper and their architecture will become more and more open. Irrespective of appetite for change, there are several no-regret moves banks can make now:Even if the core banking system is not an immediate issue for a bank, it is very likely to reach the C-suite agenda at some point. Next-gen cloud-based core banking systems are gaining more and more traction, and they will rapidly try to become natural alternatives to traditional core banking systems. Banks should start laying the no-regret groundwork and do all they can now to prepare for a migration to a newer system in the medium-term without neglecting tactical modernization of the existing core.