
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Science and Innovation Network Country Snapshot – Brazil
  

  
  

  
    
  An introductory brief from the UK Science and Innovation Network which covers the local Science and Innovation landscape, UK priorities and successes in Brazil.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      26 October 2015
      Last updated
      
        7 February 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    UK Science & Innovation Network Country Snapshot, January 2020
    
        MS Word Document, 32.9KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Science and Innovation Network Country Snapshot for Brazil provides information on the local Science and Innovation landscape, UK priorities and successes. It offers a snapshot of information under the headings: Science & Innovation Landscape; UK Science & Innovation, and Science and Innovation Network recent success stories and future activities. There is also a list of Science and Innovation Network contacts for further enquiries.



        
      

      
    Published 26 October 2015
    Last updated 7 February 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 February 2020
              We have updated the UK Science & Innovation Network Country Snapshot attachment to the 2020 version
            
            
              8 July 2019
              Country Snapshop has been updated with new document.
            
            
              26 October 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Trade and invest

  




      

    World locations

  


        Brazil

  


  

  


    
  


    