
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Right On Time: Automating Military Logistics
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA is seeking to identify innovations that can deliver a step change in military logistics capability across the Maritime, Land and Air domains.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      2 February 2021
      Last updated
      
        24 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition document: Right On Time
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: Right On Time
    
        PDF, 453KB, 9 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: Right On Time
    
        PDF, 335KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Right On Time: Automating Military Logistics Q&A 
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition, run on behalf of the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), is seeking to engage with industry and academia to identify, develop, and demonstrate to the military logistics community, innovations that have the potential to deliver a step change in military logistics capability across the Maritime, Land and Air domains.

A total of £800k is available for this competition to fund multiple proposals, with projects showcasing their innovation at a demonstration event to be held in the UK during September 2021. It is likely that a larger number of lower-value proposals (for example £40k to £80k ex. VAT) will be funded than a small number of higher-value proposals. We are interested in technologies which can be progressed towards Technical Readiness Level (TRL) 6 within the time scale of this contract.

We encourage collaboration between organisations for this competition. To support this we have a short survey to collect details of those who wish to explore collaboration possibilities. If you are interested in a collaboration, please complete the survey and your details will be circulated among other potential suppliers who have completed the survey and are interested in collaborating.

This competition closes at midday GMT on Thursday 25th March 2021.



        
      

      
    Published 2 February 2021
    Last updated 24 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 March 2021
              Addition - Reminder to complete the Supplier Assurance Questionnaire.
            
            
              18 March 2021
              Supplier Assurance Questionnaire highlighted as a reminder.
            
            
              5 March 2021
              Addition of Right On Time: Automating Military Logistics Q&A document.
            
            
              15 February 2021
              Additional 1-to-1 date added
            
            
              2 February 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence and Security Accelerator funded contracts
        CDE themed competition: synthetic biology applications in defence
        CDE themed competition: open-source big data insight
        CDE themed competition: autonomy in hazardous scene assessment
        CDE themed competition: defence medical sciences

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Armed forces
        Military equipment, logistics and technology
        Research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    