 Historically, venture capital firms have been the first investors in many of the world’s largest and most influential companies including Google, Facebook, Twitter, Uber and many other global tech companies. The business model, culture, and values of global companies are often shaped in the early years of a company’s development, and venture capital firms as the first investors and board members play an important role in this process.In the last few years, the world’s largest tech companies have run into major challenges in managing societal issues—the result of which has been governments, media, and activists taking a much deeper look how foundational values and cultures were shaped.The conversation around who is accountable for ensuring technology companies manage public purpose issues often focuses on the role of the company leadership team or the government. Yet another group—investors—also play a pivotal role. During the last decade the practice of responsible investing has become increasingly mainstream. In 2018, more than 70% of institutional investors integrated ESG (environment, social, governance) considerations into the selection and management of their investments. ESG practices now span major asset classes from public companies, private equity, real estate, bonds, and commodities. Yet This report reviews a range of dilemmas that the venture capital industry faces in managing ESG considerations and proposes potential solutions that the industry could adopt. The path forward for advancing public purpose in venture capital could involve multiple strategies including:Tools and trainings for VCs and founders to assess values, stakeholders, risks, and unintended consequences.
			 Independent evaluations of technological readiness, product-market fit, and societal impacts.
			 Tools for venture boards and whistleblowing mechanism.Third party scoring of ESG performance and other relevant data to public purpose.
			 Comparable data on ventures performance on ESG and public purpose issues.Increase diversity in VC firm and portfolio company leadership.
			 Trainings for an ethical culture in VC firms and portfolio companies. This discussion paper is not intended to be a comprehensive study of the venture capital, ESG, or frontier technology industries. It highlights several challenges and some potential solutions for advancing managing societal impacts of venture capital firms and portfolio companies.This paper includes the following sections: 