
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Farming Equipment and Technology Fund: accessibility statement
  

  
  
  
      
  Accessibility statement for the Farming Equipment and Technology Fund information and service.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      16 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Using this website

        
        
          How accessible this website is

        
        
          What to do if you cannot access parts of this portal

        
        
          Reporting accessibility problems with this website

        
        
          Enforcement procedure

        
        
          Contacting us by phone or visiting us in person

        
        
          Technical information about this website’s accessibility

        
        
          How we tested this website

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Using this website

The Farming Equipment and Technology Fund (FETF) provides support to businesses so that they can invest in equipment and technology to improve sustainable agricultural, horticultural and forestry productivity.

The scheme uses an online application portal. We want as many people as possible to be able to use this portal to apply online for the scheme. For example, that means you should be able to:


  change contrast levels and fonts
  text spacing can be reasonably adjusted to 1.5x line height
  zoom in up to 200% without the text spilling off the screen
  navigate most of the website using just a keyboard
  navigate most of the website using speech recognition software
  listen to most of the website using a screen reader (including the most recent versions of JAWS, NVDA and VoiceOver)


We have also made the website text as simple as possible to understand.

AbilityNet has advice on making your device easier to use if you have a disability.

How accessible this website is

We know some parts of this website are not fully accessible:


  whilst the website is designed to work on tablet devices, the website fails to respond on smaller mobile device screens
  screen readers and other assistive technologies may not identify forms, headings, links, tables, logos and error messages correctly and consistently
  the website requires Javascript in order to function correctly; it is not possible to navigate through the site in full with Javascript disabled
  certain assistive technologies may not correctly identify the parts of the site that contain dynamically generated content
  a user’s progress through the site is not saved at the end of each section.


What to do if you cannot access parts of this portal

If you need help completing the portal


  email FETFenquiries@rpa.gov.uk

  call 0300 020 0301 and follow the option for the FETF (Monday to Friday, 8.30am to 5pm)


We will consider your request and get back to you within 10 days.

Reporting accessibility problems with this website

We are always looking to improve the accessibility of this website. If you find any problems that are not listed on this page or think we are not meeting the requirements of the accessibility regulations, contact:


  email FETFenquiries@rpa.gov.uk

  call 0300 020 0301 and follow the option for the FETF (Monday to Friday, 8.30am to 5pm)


Enforcement procedure

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the accessibility regulations. If you are not happy with how we respond to your complaint, contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS).

Contacting us by phone or visiting us in person

We do not currently have a text relay service for people who are deaf, hearing impaired or have a speech impediment. You can contact us by:


  email FETFenquiries@rpa.gov.uk

  call 0300 0200 301 and follow the option for the FETF (Monday to Friday, 8.30am to 5pm)
  Twitter https://twitter.com/Ruralpay

  Facebook https://www.facebook.com/RuralPaymentsAgency/



Currently due to COVID-19 we do not have the facilities for you to visit us in person.

Technical information about this website’s accessibility

The Rural Payments Agency is committed to making its website accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

This service is partially compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.1 AA standard, due to the non-compliances listed.

How we tested this website

The service has been tested and checked for compliance with WCAG 2.1 AA.

It was tested by the Defra Digital, Data & Technology Services team, and the non-compliant elements will be included in the ongoing development work.

This statement was prepared on 7 October 2021.





      
        
    Published 16 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Farming Transformation Fund: How to fill in a Water Management grant Full Application
        Small Grant scheme - livestock handling items in short supply
        Farming Transformation Fund Water Management grant: check if you can apply
        Farming Transformation Fund Water Management grant
        Farming Transformation Fund    Water Management grant manual   

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    