
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Dstl research and funding priorities
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance to industry and academia on priority areas and funding opportunities for science and technology, research and development, and innovation 2021 to 2025.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Ministry of Defence, and Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      12 August 2021
      Last updated
      
        1 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Supercharging Science: opening session

        
        
          Artificial intelligence, autonomy and robotics

        
        
          Science and technology futures

        
        
          Space

        
        
          Cyber resilience

        
        
          Underwater

        
        
          Energetics

        
        
          Weapons

        
        
          How to work with or sell to Dstl


        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The unprecedented increase in the defence budget will mean around £6.6 billion funding for research and development, including around £1 billion extra on science and technology over the next 4 years.

The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) is calling upon the best minds from science, technology, engineering, innovation, and academia to work with its world-class teams to deliver on the most ambitious programme in its 20 year history.

This page explains Dstl’s priorities for the next 4 years, predominantly covering the technology areas where there will be extra funding and new collaboration opportunities for industry and academia.

These priorities were set out at our Supercharging Science virtual event on 22 July 2021. You’ll find presentations and videos from the event as part of this guide.


Sign up for our series of follow-up webinars exploring the opportunities available and how to bid for work.


You can also watch the keynote speech from DSEI 2021, where Doug Umbers (Interim CEO, Dstl), and Dame Angela McLean (Chief Scientific Adviser, DST) talk about the future of science and technology within defence.

DSEI Keynote Address - The Future of Defence Science & Technology

Supercharging Science: opening session


Supercharging Science - working with Dstl as part of the UK science superpower.

This session explained the Ministry of Defence (MOD) and Dstl’s strategies for delivering science and technology and to kickstart engagement with industry and academia following announcement of increased investment by the UK government.

It included top level briefings from:


  
Dstl Interim Chief Executive Doug Umbers
  
MOD Director Defence Science and Technology Dr Nick Joad
  
Dstl Chief Technical Officer Andy Bell



Video
Watch the opening session of Supercharging Science

Supercharging Science opening session transcript (ODT, 21KB)



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    Supercharging Science - Defence Science and Technology
    
        ODP, 19.1MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  




Strategies

The key strategy documents influencing MOD and Dstl’s priorities which are referenced throughout Supercharging Science are:


  Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development, and Foreign Policy
  MOD’s Science & Technology Strategy
  Defence and Security Industrial Strategy (DSIS)
  Defence in a competitive age



Artificial intelligence, autonomy and robotics


Video
Watch Delivering at machine speed: Artificial Intelligence, autonomy and robotics



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    AI and Autonomy: Delivering at Machine Speed
    
        ODP, 10.9MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



Artificial intelligence (AI)

Dstl de-mystifies AI. We help MOD understand how it can responsibly and ethically adopt AI in order to deter and de-escalate conflict, save lives and reduce harm.

There will be approximately £80m funding for our AI programme in the coming 4 years.


AI technology areas of interests


  Architectures and standard
    
      Open architectures
      Data centric security
    
  
  Broad AI
    
      Advanced AI algorithms
      Going beyond ‘narrow AI’
      
AI at the edge
      Low size-weight power
      Novel AI hardware solutions
      Trustworthy and safe AI systems
      Test and evaluation
      Verification and validation
      Robustness
    
  
  Human machine teaming
    
      Human-in-systems
      Human machine interfaces
      
AI ethics
    
  
  Data sparse learning
    
      Few/one/zero shot learning
      Data efficient learning
    
  



Read more about AI and data science and how to work with us



Contact us
To make contact with or to sign up to updates from the AI team, email ai_lab@dstl.gov.uk



Future events:


  AI Fest 4 takes place 12 to 13 October 2021. Register by emailing ai_lab@dstl.gov.uk




Robotics and autonomous systems

In this area MOD is seeking to advance autonomy to enable tasks that are ‘dull, dirty, dangerous, distant, demanding, and distributed’.

We anticipate the funding in this area to be in the region of £30 to £40 million a year over the next 5 years.

Key challenges include:


  Reduced human burden
  Enhanced combat mass
  Improve tempo and agility
  Decrease risk and casualties
  Improve operational efficiency


Science and technology futures

Video

Watch Science & Technology Futures: making sense of the unknown



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    S&T Futures: Making sense of the unknown
    
        ODP, 5.96MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



This programme aims to ensure defence is better prepared for the future through revitalised investment in S&T Futures activity. It identifies potential, incubates and rapidly tests hypotheses, and promotes emerging insights into generation-after-next science and technology.

There is funding of £19m for financial year 2021 to 2022 with between 40% and 60% contracted to industry and academia.

Futures technology areas of interest


  A broad range of emerging and generation after next science and technology, including:
  Autonomous systems and robots
  Power and energy storage
  Artificial intelligence
  Sensors


We also need to understand the implications of future science and technology:


  Large global trends
  The interests of our allies and adversaries
  Research and development activity by other sectors
  Ethical, moral and legal implications



Contact us:
FuturesEngagement@dstl.gov.uk


Space


Video

Watch Space: the next frontier for research and development



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    Space: the next frontier for research and development 
    
        ODP, 2.06MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



Space has its most substantive defence investment since the 1970s. Industry and academia will be critical if the UK is to deliver on its ambitious agenda.

MOD is investing around £5 billion over the next decade to enhance satellite communications capabilities through the Skynet programme but also a further £1.4 billion in the acquisition and development of new initiatives.

Defence will carry out more space related science activity, research and development, and operational concept demonstrators.

Space technology areas of interest


  Space situational awareness
  The space environment
  Space intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
  Space control and resilience
  Military satellite communications
  Satellite launch, infrastructure and operations
  Space architectures and advice
  Space-based positioning, navigation and timing


Cyber resilience


Video

Watch Transforming cyber resilience



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    Transforming cyber resilience 
    
        ODP, 1.47MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



Cyber defence science and technology provides innovative, agile and timely outcomes to support MOD and UK Government delivering cyber resilience.

The programme has funding of around £75m over the next 4 years with a focus on:


  Non-conventional IT systems
  Working with severe constraints in bandwidth, power or space


Cyber resilience technology areas of interest


  Safe-by-default programming language
  Secure-by-design hardware
  Context aware decision making
  Human-machine teaming
  Autonomous decision making
  Reinforcement learning in cyber
  Hosted environments
  Simulation
  Automated recovery
  Quantum communications and networking
  Data centric security
  Low power compute



Contact us:

You can contact the cyber transformation team by emailing CD_enhancement@dstl.gov.uk


Underwater


Video
Watch Power Beneath the waves: science and technology for the underwater environment



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    Power beneath the waves: S&T for the underwater environment 
    
        ODP, 31.3MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



Underwater is a vitally important domain for defence. The world is increasingly visible and interconnected. But underwater is large, harsh and varied. Traditional systems are not effective underwater and it is a great place to hide - for us and our adversaries.

Challenge areas


  Underwater defensive aids
  Environmental understanding
  Uncrewed systems and autonomy
  Machine learning and artificial intelligence
  Signature mitigation and control
  Underwater  command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence (known as C4I)
  Propulsors
  Concepts and integration
  Decision making
  Underwater survivability
  Sensing
  Underwater weapons


Energetics


Video

Watch The future is explosive



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    The future is explosive 
    
        ODP, 23.4MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



Energetics covers propellants, explosives and pyrotechnics.

It is a critical and underpinning technology across defence and security. They are fundamental to virtually all weapons systems. They are usually sub components of a bigger system and are often regarded as a mature technology, therefore research into them over previous decades had been in decline.

As the mission and system requirements change, energetic material components need to evolve with them such as miniaturisation, tougher environments, longer service life, reduced through life costs.

Around £9 million funding for industry and academia is expected to be invested over 4 years to accelerate the discovery and delivery of new energetic materials through the Advanced Energetic Materials project.

Key requirement areas


  New weapons
  Disposal
  Novel materials
  Novel manufacturing
  Novel diagnostics - trials and evaluation
  Explosive ordnance disposals
  Security of supply
  National security and support to operations


Key challenges


  Maintaining the military advantage
  Smaller, faster, cheaper
  New energetics


Technical themes


  Accelerating discovery of new explosive molecules
  Accelerating synthesis using machines
  Novel and alternative chemical synthesis approaches
  Novel and alternative biological synthesis approaches



Contact us:

AEMproject@dstl.gov.uk


Weapons


Video

Watch Defend and Protect: the future of weapons



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    Defend and protect: the future of weapons
    
        ODP, 7.6MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



Weapons are a core means for defence to achieve its purpose to protect the people of the United Kingdom, to prevent conflict, and to be ready to fight our enemies.

Weapons and weapons systems are a significant enduring capability where emerging technologies can give the UK an edge over adversaries in the future.

Areas of interest


  Driving missile technologies
  Survivable weapons
  Performance effectiveness
  Weapons technology maturation and assurance
  Energy weapons
  Tactical weapons


Priority areas


  High speed and hypersonic systems
    
      Aerodynamic and aerothermal environment
      Guidance technologies for high speed systems
      Sensing
      Effects
      Performance modelling and simulation
    
  
  Directed energy
    
      Smaller, lighter, robust and reliable systems
      Propagation and effects of energy weapons
      Protection against energy weapons
      Investigate new and alternative technologies
    
  
  Cooperative weapons
    
      Hardware
      Software
      Datalinks
      Tactics development
    
  


How to work with or sell to Dstl



Video

Watch How to work with or sell to Dstl



Presentation


  
      
  
  
    How to work or sell to Dstl 
    
        ODP, 12MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



In this session, Dstl’s commercial team explain how potential suppliers from academia and industry can work with or sell to Dstl. The session also includes a briefing on acquisition reform, routes to market, and a briefing by the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) which includes funding opportunities.

Relevant guidance

How to work with or sell to Dstl


Contact us:
SRM@dstl.gov.uk






      
        
    Published 12 August 2021
    Last updated 1 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 September 2021
              Adding link to registration page for a series of industry webinars, following up the Supercharging Science day.
            
            
              12 August 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        AI and data science: defence science and technology capability
        How to sell to or work with Dstl
        Dstl science and technology procurement frameworks
        R-Cloud
        How to license Dstl technologies

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    