
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Help to Build: Making building your own home more affordable
  

  
  

  
    
  A new government equity loan for people who want to self build or custom build their own home.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Homes England

      
      Published
      26 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Help to Build: Equity Loan prospectus
    
        PDF, 1.85 MB, 12 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@homesengland.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Help to Build: Equity Loan prospectus, accessible version
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

Applications will open for Help to Build: Equity Loan during winter. You can register your interest in the scheme now.


Homes England lend the Help to Build equity loan. We are an executive non-departmental public body
sponsored by the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities.

Homes England as an entity and Help to Build: Equity Loan as a product are exempt from Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) authorisation and regulation.



        
      

      
    Published 26 November 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Help to Build marketing toolkit
        Self and custom build action plan
        Home Building Fund: developer case studies
        Home Building Fund
        Low-cost home ownership schemes

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        House building

  


  

  


    
  


    