
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Method validation in digital forensics
  

  
  

  
    
  Provides guidance and advice on validation stages and how the process can be applied within the digital forensic sciences.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Forensic Science Regulator

      
      Published
      9 June 2016
      Last updated
      
        24 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Method validation in digital forensics
    
        
          Ref: FSR-G-218
        
        PDF, 278KB, 42 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Validation involves demonstrating that the method is fit for the specific purpose intended, and that any limitations are understood and explained.

You can view the previous version of this guidance on the national archives.



        
      

      
    Published 9 June 2016
    Last updated 24 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 September 2020
              Replaced with an accessible version.
            
            
              9 June 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        DNA analysis: codes of practice and conduct
        Effect of COVID-19 pandemic on accreditation
        Cell site analysis
        Forensic science providers: codes of practice and conduct, 2011 to 2014
        Allele frequency databases and reporting for DNA profiling

  




      

    Collection

  


        Forensic science providers: codes of practice and conduct

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    