
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Commonwealth Marine Economies Programme
  

  
  
  
      
  Enabling safe and sustainable marine economies across Commonwealth Small Island Developing States (SIDS). 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office, Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office, Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, and UK Hydrographic Office

      
      Published
      17 November 2016
      Last updated
      
        30 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Challenges

        
        
          
SIDS in scope

        
        
          Programme update

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Commonwealth Marine Economies (CME) Programme was announced by the British Prime Minister in 2015 and subsequently launched in 2016.

This UK government programme aims to support the marine economies (also refered to as blue economies) of 17 Commonwealth Small Island Developing States (SIDS). It aims to support them in identifying the potential of, and developing, their marine economies in a sustainable, resilient, and integrated way.

The programme promotes growth, innovation, jobs and investment, whilst safeguarding healthy seas and ecosystems. In partnership with the SIDS, the programme will develop and implement national Maritime Economy Plans to ensure the programme leaves a lasting legacy.

At the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in April 2018, 53 countries agreed a landmark Commonwealth Blue Charter. The charter sets out how member states will lead international efforts to sustainably develop and protect our ocean. The CME Programme is an integral part of the UK’s effort to protect the health of the world’s oceans and promote the growth of blue economies.

The programme supports CME SIDS by building the capacity of the islands to manage their marine resources and develop their national maritime economies. It is also helping to address climate change, including the UN Sustainable Development Goal 14 (to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development) and the Paris Climate Change Accord.

The CME Programme ensures that activities and initiatives across nations and regions are harmonised to avoidoverlaps, and recognise synergies. This aligns with the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office’s (FCDO) work to bring together all of the government’s international oceans work under a single strategy as announced by the Foreign Secretary in June 2018.

The FCDO is leading this programme, which showcases UK world leading expertise in marine science through delivery partners at United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO), the Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas), and the National Oceanography Centre (NOC). The programme is also working with a team of technical experts who will be working in partnership with SIDS governments to develop national Maritime Economy Plans.



Challenges

SIDS face common threats and challenges due to their small size and populations, remoteness, narrow economic bases and high degree of vulnerability to external economic and environmental shocks.

In addition to these challenges, there are the impacts of:


  climate change
  ocean acidification
  extreme weather events
  pollution
  over-fishing
  loss of habitats
  lack of modern hydrographic data


These threaten the connectivity, subsistence livelihoods, commercial fishing and food supplies of SIDS. The populations of SIDS account for a tiny fraction of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions but are likely to be among the first to suffer the consequences of global warming. SIDS are home to communities experiencing high levels of poverty.


SIDS in scope

Seventeen states (including coastal states) are in scope of the programme from the Caribbean and Pacific Ocean regions. These countries’ programmes fulfil the project criteria since they are Commonwealth SIDS and are eligible to receive Official Development Assistance:


  Antigua and Barbuda
  Belize
  Dominica
  Fiji
  Grenada
  Guyana
  Jamaica
  Kiribati
  Nauru
  Papua New Guinea
  St Lucia
  St Vincent and the Grenadines
  Samoa
  Solomon Islands
  Tonga
  Tuvalu
  Vanuatu


See also an overview for activity in the Caribbean region.

Programme update
CME successes, highlighting progress in the first 2 years of the programme, prepared by the Programme for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in April 2018, highlights a few specific successes realised by the Programme to date.

This Commonwealth Marine Economies factsheet (PDF, 719KB, 4 pages) explains how the CME Programme is helping SIDS to build sustainable marine economies through the developing of National Maritime Economy Plans.





      
        
    Published 17 November 2016
    Last updated 30 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 March 2021
              Link to the new Caribbean region document added.
            
            
              29 November 2018
              Added links to CME programmes by country
            
            
              17 January 2018
              Updated factsheet
            
            
              8 November 2017
              Added Antigua and Barbuda as a country in scope
            
            
              4 October 2017
              Added information about Year 2 of the programme
            
            
              17 November 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Commonwealth Marine Economies (CME) Programme: Caribbean Marine Climate Change Report Card Scientific Reviews
        Commonwealth Marine Economies (CME) Programme: year 1 projects in the Caribbean
        Address for UK's Inaugural Commonwealth Marine Economies Programme
        Address for Commonwealth Marine Economies Programme Workshop: Indian Ocean

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Marine

  


  

  


    
  


    