
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Humber – Enhancing Digital Skills (OC18S20P1736 )                                                                                                                                  
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project to assess the skills profile of employed people and provide digital skills training which up-skills the workforce and supports SMEs to adopt new technologies.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      11 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        17 July 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      Yorkshire and Humber
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      14 July 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit and application for this call. The information provided is for reference purposes only.


Details

The programme must deliver highly responsive skills provision to meet business and
industry needs.  Activities should:


  Provide practical support through coaching, advice, consultancy and mentoring to individuals seeking to improve digital skills to support SMEs to utilise digital technology to improve their products and competitiveness.
  Assess the current skills profile of the individual, with a bespoke training plan which relates to the sector in which they are employed and the employer’s needs and to develop the appropriate training option or provide access to it.
  Drive up skills levels, focusing on the digital skills being sought by employers or those identified through delivery that will make an impact on the SME business.
  Deliver skills provision which offers both accredited and non-accredited skills training which is innovative and responsive to local skills needs.
  Encourage more women to engage in digital skills and help address the gender employment and wage gap.
  Foster an aspirational, digital and enterprising culture in SMEs.


The programmes of activity must be delivered across the whole of the Humber.  Applicants must demonstrate how they will ensure that is achieved and that participants in each local authority area of the Humber take part in the programme (Hull, East Riding, North and North East Lincolnshire).

For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Humber LEP area.

Value

Approximately £1m of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 14 July 2020

Completion date

Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.

The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details

If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 11 March 2020
    Last updated 17 July 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 July 2020
              Humber – Enhancing Digital Skills (OC18S20P1736 ) project call is now closed.
            
            
              18 June 2020
              Humber – Enhancing Digital Skills (OC18S20P1736 ) application deadline has been changed to 14 July 2020
            
            
              23 April 2020
              Humber – Enhancing Digital Skills (OC18S20P1736 ) project call deadline has been extended to 30 June 2020.
            
            
              11 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    