

This Data Note draws on data from the spring 2019 American Instructional Resources Survey to provide new insights from English language arts, math, and science teachers on their use of digital materials, their relationship with comprehensive curriculum materials, and barriers to digital material use.




Read Online

Digital Instructional Materials
What Are Teachers Using and What Barriers Exist?
by Katie Tosh, Sy Doan, Ashley Woo, Daniella Henry
Related Topics: Education Curriculum, Educational Equity, Educational Technology, The Internet, Teachers and Teaching
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download Free Electronic Document

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.2 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

Which digital materials do teachers regularly use to plan lessons and in the classroom? Which digital materials do teachers use the most?How does teachers' use of digital materials compare with use of comprehensive curriculum materials?What are the barriers to digital material use?What factors influence teachers' use of digital materials?



This Data Note adds new insights from English language arts (ELA), math, and science teachers on their use of digital materials. Drawing on data from the spring 2019 American Instructional Resources Survey, researchers share the digital materials that ELA, math, and science teachers across the United States reported using regularly for instruction during the 2018–2019 school year. In addition to identifying the most commonly used digital instructional materials, researchers examine how teachers' use of these materials compares with their use of comprehensive curriculum materials, as well as teacher-reported barriers to digital material use. Finally, researchers explore several hypotheses regarding factors that might influence digital material use.
Key Findings

Teachers use digital materials, although barriers still existMost teachers use digital materials both for planning and classroom instruction. However, the majority of teachers use these materials to supplement other comprehensive curriculum materials rather than as main instructional materials.
For all subjects, the top digital materials used during instructional time include a mix of general resources, such as YouTube, and content-specific resources, such as ReadWorks and Khan Academy.
When digital materials are used as main instructional materials, content-specific or standards-aligned digital materials, such as those from iReady, Newsela, and Khan Academy, tended to feature more prominently than materials from general digital sources, such as YouTube.
Teachers who used standards-aligned comprehensive curricula, who had more low-income students, or who attended district or charter management organization--run teacher preparation programs were more likely to use digital materials.
The expenses of using digital materials, both for schools and students at home, were the most commonly cited barriers to digital material use, with these barriers being particularly prevalent among teachers with more low-income students.


Recommendations

Additional research could explore more-nuanced definitions and scenarios of digital material use to deepen understanding of how teachers are using main comprehensive curriculum materials and digital materials and how and why teachers supplement their main materials.
Districts and policymakers should assess the technology assets in schools and how they are used to better understand how existing resources are provisioned and where additional resources could remove barriers to use of digital materials.
Efforts to rate the quality of comprehensive curricula should also extend to digital instructional materials, providing parents and practitioners with information on their quality, alignment with state standards, and appropriateness for different types of students.



 Related Products 









Project
The American Educator Panels

Jul 3, 2018










Report
Learn Together Surveys

Dec 31, 2019
William R. Johnston, Laura S. Hamilton, et al.










Report
How Much Influence Do Teachers Have in Their Schools?

Apr 7, 2020
William R. Johnston, Goke Akinniranye, et al.










Report
AEP Data Note Technical Appendix

Dec 13, 2018
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, William R. Johnston










Report
Are Educators Setting Goals for Social-Emotional Learning?

Apr 7, 2020
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, William R. Johnston, et al.










Report
School Reform Efforts: Here Today, Gone Tomorrow?

Apr 7, 2020
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, Goke Akinniranye










Report
School Improvement Plans

Apr 8, 2020
Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss, Goke Akinniranye, et al.










Report
Perceptions of School Leadership

Apr 9, 2020
Katie Tosh, Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss










Report
Time for Change?

Apr 9, 2020
Rachel Perera, Courtney Armstrong










Report
Students with Unique Learning Profiles

Apr 10, 2020
Tiffany Berglund, William R. Johnston










Report
Educator Access to and Use of Data Systems

Apr 10, 2020
Tiffany Berglund, Katie Tosh










Report
Where Do Educators Turn to Address Instructional and Behavior Challenges?

Apr 15, 2020
Laura S. Hamilton, Gerald P. Hunter










Report
AEP Data Note Technical Appendix 2

Aug 15, 2019
William R. Johnston, Christopher Joseph Doss @Chris_J_Doss










Report
Are U.S. Teachers Using High-Quality Instructional Materials?

Apr 15, 2020
Julia H. Kaufman @juliahkaufman, Katie Tosh, et al.










Report
Learning from Peers on a Large Scale

Apr 15, 2020
Elizabeth D. Steiner @ED_Steiner, William R. Johnston










Report
Principals Could Use More Support to Help Students with Disabilities -- Especially in Schools Serving Mostly Students of Color

Dec 31, 2019
Laura Stelitano, William R. Johnston, et al.










Report
Writing Instruction in U.S. Classrooms

May 14, 2020
William R. Johnston










Report
Data Access and Use Among Middle and High School Principals

Jun 11, 2020
Laura S. Hamilton, William R. Johnston










Report
Teachers' Use of Intervention Programs

Mar 19, 2020
Laura Stelitano, Sy Doan, et al.







Research conducted by

RAND Education and Labor



The research described in this report was conducted by RAND Education and Labor and supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Charles and Lynn Schusterman Family Foundation, and the Overdeck Family Foundation. For this document, different permissions for re-use apply. Please refer to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation section on our permissions page.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Publisher: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 12
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR2575.17
Document Number: RR-2575/17-BMGF/SFF/OFF
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Education CurriculumEducational EquityEducational TechnologyThe InternetTeachers and Teaching

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Tosh, Katie, Sy Doan, Ashley Woo, and Daniella Henry, Digital Instructional Materials: What Are Teachers Using and What Barriers Exist?. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2575z17.html.
Tosh, Katie, Sy Doan, Ashley Woo, and Daniella Henry, Digital Instructional Materials: What Are Teachers Using and What Barriers Exist?, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2575/17-BMGF/SFF/OFF, 2020. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2575z17.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



