
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research
  

  
  

  
    
  The Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research are based at UK universities.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport, National Cyber Security Centre, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, Government Communications Headquarters, and The Rt Hon Nigel Adams MP

      
      Published
      25 March 2014
      Last updated
      
        3 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research - NCSC website 
    
        https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/academic-centres-excellence-cyber-security-research
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This page out details of the 19 UK universities which are recognised as Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research (ACE-CSRs).

These universities are carrying out some of the leading UK cyber security research. The brochure available via the link above contains details of what they specialise in and how they contribute to the UK’s increased knowledge and capability in cyber security. This work contributes to the government’s National Cyber Security Strategy, which is making the UK the safest place to live and work online.

In July 2015 we published a brochure setting out the work of the first thirteen UK universities recognised as ACE-CSRs.

In 2017, the University of Warwick was recognised as an ACE-CSR, bringing the total to fourteen universities recognised by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, along with the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and GCHQ.

In 2018, a further three universities - Cardiff University, University of Kent and Kings College London - were recognised as ACE-CSRs.

In 2019, a further two new universities - Northumbria University and De Montfort University - were recognised as ACE-CSRs, bringing the total to 19.

The current list of ACE-CSRs is as follows:


  
    Queens University Belfast
  
  
    University of Birmingham
  
  
    University of Bristol
  
  
    University of Cambridge
  
  
    Cardiff University
  
  
    De Montfort University
  
  
    University of Edinburgh
  
  
    University of Kent
  
  
    Kings College London
  
  
    Lancaster University
  
  
    Imperial College London
  
  
    University College London
  
  
    Royal Holloway, University of London
  
  
    Newcastle University
  
  
    Northumbria University
  
  
    University of Oxford
  
  
    University of Southampton
  
  
    University of Surrey
  
  
    University of Warwick
  


Please visit the link at the top of the page to see the updated ACE-CSR brochure.




        
      

      
    Published 25 March 2014
    Last updated 3 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 December 2020
              A new and updated brochure is now available on the NCSC website - see link at top of page.
            
            
              13 August 2019
              Updated the list of ACE-CSRs to include the 2019 cohort.
            
            
              25 August 2017
              List of Universities updated.
            
            
              1 March 2016
              This brochure was updated in 2015 when two additional academic institutions - the University of Kent and the University of Surrey - gained recognition as Academic Centres of Excellence in Cyber Security Research.
            
            
              25 March 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Cyber security
        National security

  


  

  


    
  


    