
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Libraries as a statutory service
  

  
  

  
    
  This guidance is intended to help councils in England and others in considering library service provision as a statutory service.



  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      16 December 2015
      Last updated
      
        15 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Libraries as a statutory service
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This document provides guidance on councils’ duty to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service.

On 19 July 2021, with the move to step 4 of the Government’s roadmap for easing coronavirus-related restrictions, most remaining legal restrictions on the operation of public libraries in England were lifted.  The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport recognises that full restoration of all services will take place in a phased way, varying according to local needs and circumstances.  We recognise decisions on service delivery should continue to be informed by risk assessments involving staff, unions and local public health advice and should be regularly reviewed. The Government has issued guidance on reducing the risk of the spread of coronavirus in workplaces; and Libraries Connected, the sector support organisation for public library services, has published operational guidance, prepared in consultation with Public Health England.

For the time being, DCMS will interpret compliance with the statutory duty to provide a comprehensive and efficient library service in light of updated public health guidance and regulations - and in light of actions taken to further combat the spread of COVID-19 (such as temporary local repurposing of public library premises as testing and vaccination centres and any staff redeployment needed to support this activity).   This interpretation will apply until such time as the national situation changes.  We will review the position in light of any future government announcements that might affect access to library locations and library services.

The information contained in this document is provided to help guide local councils and others. This text should not in any way be taken as formal legal advice or be used as the basis for formal council decisions. All councils should seek their own legal advice on any proposed changes they wish to make to their library service.

We would like councils considering changing their library service to inform the DCMS Libraries team about their proposals before public engagement or consultation. Details about such proposals should be emailed to: libraries@dcms.gov.uk

It sets out:


  what the law says about the public library responsibilities of the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS), Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG), and councils
  how to make representations about whether the council is meeting its statutory duties
  the process DCMS will follow to consider formal complaints


This guidance accompanies the Strategic planning: longer-term, evidence-based sustainable planning toolkit produced by the Libraries Taskforce.



        
      

      
    Published 16 December 2015
    Last updated 15 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              15 December 2021
              Amended to reflex current Covid regulations and guidance.
            
            
              3 August 2021
              Updated in line with step 4 Covid roadmap
            
            
              30 June 2020
              Service Recovery Toolkit added
            
            
              26 March 2020
              New Coronavirus lines following government announcement to close public libraries on Monday 23 March 2020.
            
            
              23 July 2019
              This revision aims to clarify the duties and the processes we follow to councils and people wishing to make representations about a library service to DCMS.

As part of the rewrite we have sought to clarify the superintendence process (to councils and the public)
and our requirements about evidence we want people to provide if they’re making a representation about a library service (the public). We have also moved detail which impeded the flow of the document into annexes and included an annex of sector bodies who can provide guidance or support to councils that ask them for help or advice about reviewing their public library services and strategies.
            
            
              16 December 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Coronavirus support from Business Representative Organisations and Trade Associations
        Coronavirus and self-isolation after testing positive in England: 1 November to 6 November 2021

  




      

    Collection

  


        Libraries shaping the future: toolkit and case studies

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Library services
        Community and society

  


  

  


    
  


    