
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Integrate and adapt technology
  

  
  
  
      
  Your technology should adapt to future demands and work with existing technologies, processes and infrastructure in your organisation.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      6 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How integration helps your programme

        
        
          Fitting new technology into your organisation

        
        
          Meeting user needs with emerging technologies

        
        
          Related Guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet point 9 of the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) your plans must show you’ve considered how your technology project or programme integrates into your organisation.

If you’re going through the spend control process you must explain how you’re trying to meet point 9.


The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


How integration helps your programme

Good integration means making sure your new technology works with legacy solutions without limiting your ability to adapt to future demands or upgrade systems.

Your programme will benefit from:


  less risk to your infrastructure as integration planning will discover compatibility gaps in the new technology
  less downtime on your regular processes when you upgrade or amend them
  systems which enforce built-in redundancy of services, minimising single points of failure
  lower long-term support costs


Fitting new technology into your organisation

Each organisation’s technology and infrastructure will have unique services and issues. But there are some common elements to consider when fitting new technology into your current or legacy system, including:


  the coordination between your organisation’s IT operating model, the different business areas and their processes, governance, service support and service delivery
  how the new technology will work with your service management
  what skills and capabilities your organisation needs to deliver, support and continuously improve the new technology you’ll purchase
  automated decision making while adhering to the Ethics, Transparency and Accountability Framework for Automated Decision-Making



Read how the Department for Transport’s Chief Architect has created a Digital Design Authority to help integrate new technology with their current technology.

To optimise systems integration consider:


  adopting a continuous integration model so you can solve smaller issues iteratively
  designing your system using independently developed components that can easily work together
  building a system architecture early in the program to describe your current or future system and mapping hardware and software components
  defining a configuration management process
  doing component-level testing to make sure integration is possible
  doing regular integration and stress testing in your development environment to track progress and make sure the system remains robust


If you have chosen to use a systems integrator you should make sure they meet all of your requirements.

Meeting user needs with emerging technologies

A number of government organisations are using or investigating emerging technologies. If you’re thinking about introducing emerging technology to your infrastructure, you should make sure it meets user needs. You’ll need to investigate alternative mature technology solutions thoroughly to check if this is the case.

Your emerging technology programme will also benefit from checking:


  with a Central Digital and Data Office (CDDO) senior technology adviser about the cost implications and whether a mature technology better suits your needs
  whether other organisations across government are using or investigating the same emerging technology
  whether your organisation has the skills and resources to manage the technology
  what would happen if the emerging technology fails or is discontinued
  any privacy implications
  any security implications


You can find guidance on choosing technology for services, including how to adopt new technology.

Examples of emerging technologies around government

‘Emerging technologies’ is a broad term for a range of tools and techniques that are at different stages of development. Examples of emerging technology include:


  artificial intelligence and machine learning
  distributed ledger technologies (DLT)
  quantum computing


But although emerging technologies are sometimes categorised together, some are more mature than others.

Several government organisations are already using artificial intelligence or machine learning in different ways. For example, GDS is using machine learning to process large amounts of data to aid human decision-making. And Oxford City Council is leading a group of local authorities in a joint discovery on how chatbots and AI might help to solve service design problems.

If you are considering using artificial intelligence, read the guidance on using artificial intelligence in the public sector.

Some government organisations are also funding research into quantum computing. This technology is in the theoretical phase and the government is unlikely to use this technology in the short term.

Join communities of interest

You can share your experiences and find out more about what other government organisations are doing in these areas on cross-government Slack. You will need to login with your government email to join the conversations.

You can also share knowledge about these technologies with colleagues in other parts of the Civil Service using the:


  government data science Slack workspace
  government distributed ledger community


Other government organisations have published information about emerging technologies. The CDDO will publish more detailed technical guidance as best practice emerges across government.

You can contact your CDDO senior technology advisor at gdsapprovals@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk to discuss whether an emerging technology solution is right for your organisation.


Next: Technology Code of Practice point 10 - Make better use of data


Related Guides


  Government technology standards and guidance
  Networking
  Legacy
  Managing legacy technology
  Buying technology
  A guide to using artificial intelligence in the public sector
  Government technology innovation strategy





      
        
    Published 6 November 2017
    Last updated 31 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 March 2021
              Addition of a temporary research survey to get user feedback on the Technology Code of Practice.
            
            
              13 March 2019
              Addition of a section on emerging technology
            
            
              6 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Choose tools and infrastructure to make better use of your data
        Make better use of data
        Make privacy integral
        Manage your data for access and reuse
        Share, reuse and collaborate

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    