
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Make your technology sustainable
  

  
  
  
      
  Increase sustainability throughout the lifecycle of your technology.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      10 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Consider sustainability from the start of your project

        
        
          Government’s sustainability objectives

        
        
          Related guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet point 12 of the Technology Code of Practice, your plans should include how you aim to increase the sustainability of your technology project or programme by meeting the outcomes defined in the Greening Government ICT and Digital Services Strategy.


The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


Government departments should have support from a designated digital sustainability lead. If you need further support or more information, you can contact the cross-government Sustainable Technology Advice & Reporting (STAR) team by emailing STAR@defra.gov.uk. The STAR team coordinates cross-government reporting on sustainability. They also share advice and best practice with government organisations.

The benefits of increasing your project’s sustainability include:


  reducing the government’s carbon emissions
  minimising waste related to the loss of software and hardware
  meeting cross-government targets on Net Zero by 2050 and Sustainable Development Goals



Consider sustainability from the start of your project

As well as short term planning for your project’s requirements, you should aim to create a long term plan on how to increase the sustainability of your technology or service across its entire lifecycle.

At the start of your project, you should consider these questions:


  What are your organisation’s sustainability goals?
  If the contract is more than £5 million per year, has the supplier committed to meet the government’s net zero target, and published a Carbon Reduction Plan?
  Can you include specific project objectives to meet your organisation’s sustainability goals?
  Have you identified potential benefits for meeting sustainability objectives, or risks that would stop you meeting those objectives?
  Does your organisation have processes for recording and reporting on sustainability goals? For example, reporting on the targets for greenhouse gases, waste and water.
  Do your project plans include user research to more clearly define requirements and reduce the chance of buying software and hardware you do not need?
  Do you have a process or plan for recording the impact of future upgrades to software and hardware?
  Are you able to recycle or repurpose any equipment you are replacing?
  Are you able to use existing datasets for your project?
  Are there any opportunities for minimising processing, transmission and storage?
  Can you put in place processes which reduce printing and paper trails in back office systems and user facing services?
  Have you assessed whether home working is a practical and more sustainable option for your project team?


Government’s sustainability objectives

You should consider how your project or programme can work towards meeting the Greening Government ICT and Digital Services Strategy. To meet the Strategy’s main objectives, you should:


  reduce greenhouse gas emissions
  improve management of resources and waste
  procure sustainable technology and digital services


To help meet these objectives, from 30 September 2021 suppliers for new procurements worth more than £5 million per year must commit to reaching Net Zero by 2050, and publish a Carbon Reduction Plan. You can read more details in ‘Procurement Policy Note 06/21: Taking account of Carbon Reduction Plans in the procurement of major government contracts’.

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions

Your project’s energy requirements will affect your project’s sustainability. To improve this and significantly reduce your costs you should:


  use public cloud - this can reduce emissions as cloud suppliers aim to use resources more efficiently and sometimes use a green energy provider
  optimise your cloud use - by managing your cloud spending you will also use less energy
  audit your data to check for duplicate data sets - this might be a separate project if you’re dealing with a lot of data sets and find that some are legacy items
  keep an audit of your live environments and switch off unnecessary environments when possible, such as unused test environments
  decommission unnecessary systems your project might replace


If you’re creating user facing services, you can design them to use less energy if you:


  help people using your service succeed first time to reduce task repetition
  use less multimedia, if user research identifies this possibility
  choose multimedia formats that use less energy, such as standard definition rather than high definition videos
  
use the HTML publishing format instead of PDFs - along with accessibility issues, PDFs can use more energy as they’re more likely to take longer to load and to use
  avoid collecting information you do not need, to reduce the amount of server space your service uses


You should also consider how your project will measure, manage, and improve its sustainability during the project, and after it has become business as usual. Discuss with the STAR team and decide how you can:


  maintain the service or system
  optimise live systems so they use appropriate power and storage
  identify new opportunities for making better use of data sharing and processing
  report on your project’s progress against the sustainability goals and include the results in your organisation’s annual environmental report


Improve your management of resources and waste

Buying a service or managed service is usually the most sustainable option. If you have purchased physical equipment or infrastructure for your project, you should consider how to maintain and dispose of them. When assessing options for disposal, you should consider:


  if sustainable disposal options are available, such as buy-back schemes
  if other projects or programmes within government can reuse the ICT
  if you can replace technology with remanufactured ICT
  whether you can recycle non-reusable ICT


You can contact the STAR team by emailing STAR@defra.gov.uk for specific advice or help identifying opportunities for reusing physical technology.

Procuring sustainable technology and digital services

When you’re buying physical equipment or infrastructure, you should consult with your organisation’s commercial and sustainability leads to understand what sustainable procurement options are available. You can also contact the Crown Commercial Service to find out how to buy more sustainably.

When discovering your project or programmes requirements, consider if you can:


  reduce how much cloud storage and data processing your project or programme uses
  use remanufactured or recycled technology
  maximise the lifespan of the equipment used by your system or service
  optimise the energy usage of your project or programmes equipment or infrastructure


Related guides


  Government technology standards and guidance
  Greening government: ICT and digital services strategy 2020-2025
  Procurement Policy Note 06/21: Taking account of Carbon Reduction Plans in the procurement of major government contracts
  Clean Growth Strategy
  Creating and implementing a cloud hosting strategy
  Deciding how to host your service
  Make better use of data
  Managing your spending in the cloud
  Sustainable procurement
  Greening Reports Collection
  Blog post: Measuring the climate impact of our digital services at GDS
  Sustainable Technology Advice & Reporting (STAR)





      
        
    Published 10 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        The technology code of practice
        How Hackney Council built an API Platform
        Greening government: ICT and digital services strategy 2020 to 2025
        Managing your spending in the cloud
        Define your purchasing strategy

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Sustainable development

  


  

  


    
  


    