McKinsey research clearly indicates that making the right moves ahead of a crisis can build a company’s resilience. Furthermore, resilient companies are typically able to weather economic downturns better and emerge stronger, with a sustained competitive advantage, than their peers.
    
    
What about those companies that have not developed resilience? In this McKinsey podcast, senior partners Martin Hirt and Kevin Laczkowski discuss the strategic moves companies can make to build resilience in real time and navigate the current uncertainty. Their discussion focuses on the following actions:
    Putting a robust crisis-management team in place for day-to-day management;
    Creating a plan-ahead team to assemble the best possible information to guide decision-making;
    When appropriate, shifting the focus to M&A, transforming neglected business areas, and investing in digital capabilities.
These are the right moves at any time, but a crisis like COVID-19 is an accelerant. To make effective decisions in an uncertain environment—and build resilience for the long term—companies should clearly define their strategic moves and triggers for action.For more details, please listen to the podcast or read the full transcript below.Podcast transcript Hello and welcome. You are listening to a podcast by McKinsey & Company focused on COVID-19 response. This is Amanda Schmitt, Global Risk Learning manager at McKinsey & Company. In this episode, I’ll be speaking with Martin Hirt, a senior partner in McKinsey’s Taipei office, and Kevin Laczkowski, a senior partner in McKinsey’s Chicago office.Martin and Kevin are going to talk to us about some strategic moves that companies can consider making to make themselves more resilient during the current crisis. Kevin, let’s start with you: How would you define “resilience”? The way I think about resilience is a company’s ability to absorb shocks, disruptions, and cycles that impact their industry and their business. The companies we have seen that have built resilience typically are able to weather economic downturns better than others. They emerge stronger, and they typically develop a competitive advantage that sustains over a long period of time. Martin, given that we are already in the middle of this crisis, what can clients do now to be more resilient? We did a lot of research in the past couple of years, and unfortunately, we see that if you start asking about resilience now, in the middle of the crisis, you are already too late. Because our research clearly indicates that being prepared for the crisis and making the right moves ahead of the crisis is what really differentiates how businesses go through and come out of the crisis.If you haven’t specifically prepared for the crisis, I think there are two things you want to be cognizant of. One is, do you have a robust crisis-management team in place? That team looks after topics such as employee safety, which in the current health crisis is critically important; developing protocols for people to get back to work; making sure that the balance sheet is stable and that the financial viability of the company is assured; contacting suppliers—probably two, three, four levels deep—to make sure the supply chain is still intact. Depending on the situation your business is in, the team might also talk to the customers to figure out how to supply them, how to allocate orders, or, if the customers are shut down, whether you actually need to help them to ensure they are still there after the crisis. That’s what a crisis-management team does.The second thing, which we learned from the military, is that you need a plan-ahead team. That team doesn’t do the day-to-day crisis management—they do the thinking. They collect information from external and internal sources and then they focus across all time horizons. And that’s very, very important: this team has to work on the most urgent decisions the company has to take across all time horizons. Let’s say there are 15, maybe 25, decisions that are really critical. Do I accept a government bailout? Do I need to financially shore up some of my suppliers? What will happen with US–China trade, and what are the implications of that? What does my industry look like when I come out of the crisis, and what are the implications for investments, divestitures, M&A?So, across all time horizons, this team thinks about each of these issues, the scenarios that drive each issue, and the actions they would recommend. And, importantly, because the uncertainty is so high, they don’t just think about the actions for the most likely scenario but also look at alternative scenarios and say, “What if that happens? And then what do we do? How do we make sure that the course of action we recommend to our CEO is robust?”They then bring these recommendations to the CEO, and that’s highly iterative. As you learn more information, you adapt, but at any point in time, the CEO has the best possible information, with the scenarios and the judgment and the thinking about what actions to take on the table, to inform his or her own decisions. That’s the plan-ahead team. So these are two recommendations on what to practically do now that you find yourself in a crisis. Thanks, Martin. Kevin, are you able to build on that and walk us through some examples—strategic moves that clients should be thinking through at this time? We’ve looked at past disruptions, economic cycles, et cetera, to understand the kinds of things companies have done to emerge stronger and not just survive the crisis but come out as a stronger company. And we found three types of strategic moves we think companies should be thinking about when it’s appropriate for them. The first is M&A. What we saw in the last downturn is that the companies that built more resilience were very active on divestitures going into the crisis, but then were very active on M&A coming out of the downturn.The second is thinking about transforming parts of the business that have always been in need of transformation but there was not a good time to do it. A lot of companies are now moving away from providing earnings guidance for the foreseeable future and this may be an opportune time—once they have gotten through the initial economic shock and stabilized the business—to think about the parts of the business that required transformation and actually doing the things that they had always wanted to do.The third, which is a little bit unique to this crisis versus the financial crisis of 2008 or others that preceded that, is around taking the lead on digital. We are all forced to work from home, leveraging new digital capabilities. A lot of companies have had to move their channels to e-commerce during this period, where it is not safe to physically interact. So this is also a time when companies should be thinking about getting ahead on digital, which is probably one of the biggest trends that’s impacting every industry, but where a lot of companies—especially companies more in the B2B world—have been lagging. Thanks, Kevin. Martin, why is it important to make moves now, as opposed to waiting until after the crisis is over? We have proven—empirically proven in the work for our book, Strategy beyond the Hockey Stick, looking at thousands of companies over 25 years and at all stages of economic cycles—that the big moves, meaning resource allocation, M&A, capex [capital expenditures] relative to your industry, productivity relative to your industry, and differentiation relative to your industry are always the right moves. So we are not trying to figure out now, in a crisis, what is in principle the right thing to do. We know the right and the wrong things to do.The reason why the framing about timing is difficult is because some things accelerate. You might have opportunities to do M&A now at very low valuations if people are willing to sell—which, by the way, they often are not. If companies are willing to sell or forced to sell, you just have to accelerate. You shouldn’t wait, because your competitors might go for it. Other moves, such as capital-equipment expansions, you might well want to postpone until you have less uncertainty about the path of demand in the next two years. So, depending on the move, there will be things to accelerate and decelerate.I think the most important thing with respect to timing is that for each move your plan-ahead team recommends, it needs to give you trigger points that tell you when and to what extent you should execute the move. It’s very important to be extremely cognizant of what drives your decision timeline.Sometimes your hand will be forced. The government says, “Here is the bailout. Take it or leave it. You have two weeks to decide.” Okay, you have two weeks. Do your scenarios. Think it through and then decide. Other things, especially M&A, you might need to wait for the right time, whether that has to do with the availability of targets, availability of financing, or your certainty that the move is right.But I think the most important messages here is, be very explicit about what the moves are and what the trigger points for each move are. That way, as the CEO steers the company through the crisis, he or she and the top team can very deliberately, at those trigger points, make the decisions.