In 2002, the federal government established the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS), a pharmaceutical and vaccine stockpile, jointly managed by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), to provide for public health emergencies. The SNS extended earlier stockpile programs for use in case of chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear attack. In 2006, Congress funded the addition of protective equipment to the stockpile, adding 52 million surgical masks and 104 million N95 respirator masks. That legislation assigned to the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR), responsibility for coordination of the stockpile for the Secretary of HHS. During the spring 2009 H1N1 pandemic, much of the mask stockpile was depleted .In March 2013, Congress enacted the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013.  Section 403 of the Act “Reauthorizes the Strategic National Stockpile for FY2014-FY2018. Requires the Secretary of HHS to: (1) submit to the appropriate congressional committees, to the extent that the disclosure of such information does not compromise national security, the annual review of the contents of the Stockpile; and (2) review and revise the contents of the Stockpile to ensure that the potential depletion of countermeasures currently in the Stockpile is identified and appropriately addressed, including through necessary replenishment.”On October 1, 2018, the full responsibility for the SNS was transferred from CDC to ASPR. The stockpile was not replenished, however. In March 2020, the Secretary of HHS reported that the stockpile held 30 million surgical masks and 12 million N95 masks.During the period from 2006 until now, many studies have projected the needs, in the event of a pandemic, for surgical and high-intensity respirator masks, other personal protective equipment (PPE), durable equipment such as ventilators, and supplies used for testing, together with estimated quantities that should be stockpiled to help satisfy that need . In 2016, the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) held a workshop to study the SNS program and recommend improvements. The result of the failure to act on the recommendations of these studies and to appropriate and carry out the funding and actions authorized in Public Law 113-5 (as well as the failure to renew the authorization beyond 2018) has been that the United States was unprepared for the supply needs of the Spring 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. The extraordinary shortage of supplies in Spring 2020 has been well-documented in the press and has been exacerbated by supply-chain changes such as just-in-time manufacturing and globalization, and by the lack of a coordinated Federal/State plan to deploy existing supplies rapidly to locations of greatest need. There has been a persistent shortage of ventilators, testing kits, masks and other PPE, mitigated only in part by funding appropriations in late March and in April.The fault is not with the Federal Government alone. According to Greg Burel, Director of SNS from March 2007 to December 2019, SNS planning assumed that state stockpiles would also be in place, as they were in the past. For the most part, however, those stockpiles were not replenished and maintained after the 2008 financial crisis.