
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Higher technical education provider growth fund
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for eligible Further Education Colleges, Higher Education Providers, independent training providers, and Institutes of Technology on applying to the higher technical education (HTE) provider growth fund

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      11 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        5 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Guide to the higher technical education provider growth fund
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Higher technical education provider growth fund application form
    
        MS Word Document, 46.5KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ESFA.GOVUK-ENQUIRIES@education.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Common themes and advice for applying to the provider growth fund
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance is for eligible Further Education Colleges, Higher Education Providers, independent training providers, and Institutes of Technology who wish to apply to the provider growth fund.

The fund is to support capacity-building and readiness to deliver new approved Digital Higher Technical Qualifications from September 2022, and cycle 2 Digital, Construction, and Health and Science Higher Technical Qualification routes from September 2023.

Deadline to apply

Providers must submit applications by 11.59pm, Friday 9 July 2021, via email to team.highertechnicaleducation@education.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 11 June 2021
    Last updated 5 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              5 July 2021
              Common Themes section updated with eligibility, IoT specific, Learner numbers and eligible qualifications guidance added.
            
            
              18 June 2021
              We have updated the application form and the guidance document. The changes are outlined in the 'Common themes' document.
            
            
              11 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Further and higher education, skills and vocational training

  


  

  


    
  


    