The U.S. wind energy industry continues its impressive run of growth over the last two decades. In late 2019, the U.S. Energy Information Administration reported that wind energy had become the number-one renewable electricity generation source in the country. This achievement, of course, may be attributed to the collective effort of many important players, including state and local officials, industry and investors, policy and regulatory officials, and other stakeholders.Improvements to wind turbine designs can range from incremental component enhancements to dramatic innovations that change entire systems. How can researchers collaborate with industry to more rapidly develop new, high-performance, cost-competitive turbines, or modify existing turbines, without compromising proprietary information? Reference wind turbines—open-access designs of complete wind turbine systems with supporting models for simulation and design tools—make it possible to evaluate the performance and cost of proposed modifications, relative to a well-known and understood reference point, before prototype development.A new open-source reference wind turbine can be used to assess designs for offshore turbines up to 15 MW.Wind turbine blades are the largest single-piece composite structures in the world, with some now exceeding the length of a football field. Ensuring the reliability of these skyscraper-sized structures over their lifetime is a difficult challenge—these blades can’t be sent to a hangar in the same way airplanes and helicopters can when it’s time for maintenance. Inspections are performed either with telephoto cameras from the ground or using aerial drones. These methods are reasonably good at finding visible damage but currently lack the ability to detect early, hidden damage.However, recent innovations in robotics may allow for a pathway to introduce low-cost, high-tech inspections to the market: inspections that can detect deep, subsurface damage.Technologies that can reduce impacts to bats, birds, and other wildlife not only boost species conservation efforts, but also the efficiency and productivity of wind power projects. DOE supports this environmental win-win with research efforts developing technological innovations that can detect and deter wildlife from approaching wind turbine blades.Researchers at DOE’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) are gaining new insights into one such solution—the use of ultrasonic acoustic deterrents (UADs)—as part of that larger effort.  An in  magazine invited the scientific community to address three grand challenges in the physical sciences that will drive the innovation needed for wind to continue to contribute to the electricity grid as a low-cost energy source. By investing in science, research, and technology development, and rallying the scientific communities around the physical, environmental, and developmental challenges, WETO hopes for wind to reach its full potential as an environmentally sustainable source of power in the United States.  DOE announced the selection of 13 projects to receive a total of $28 million to advance wind energy nationwide. While utility-scale, land-based wind energy in the United States has grown to , significant opportunities for cost reductions remain, especially in the areas of offshore wind, distributed wind, and tall wind. The following is a curated listing of recent or high-profile publications from the Wind Energy Technologies Office and DOE National Laboratories. Visit the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy’s (EERE’s)  for research reports, publications, data sets, and online tools developed by National Laboratories and their facilities.This newsletter is also available for download: