
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Export Finance and Clean Growth
  

  
  
  
      
  How we’re supporting the global transition to a low-carbon economy and responding to the evolving needs of UK companies.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Export Finance

      
      Published
      21 July 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Export Finance Managers

        
        
          Clean Growth Direct Lending Facility

        
        
          Clean Growth case studies

        
        
          Get the Exporters’ Edge

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


There is a world of opportunity for UK companies in the clean growth, renewable energy and climate adaptation/resilience sectors.

Since 2019, UKEF has supported renewable energy projects with £800 million in financing, and following the government’s commitment to end support for the fossil fuel energy sector overseas, we are pursuing clean growth opportunities with even more vigour.

Our finance, insurance and guarantees can help exporters win, fulfil and get paid for clean growth contracts. Our General Export Facility and Export Development Guarantee (EDG) can help UK businesses invest in the transition to cleaner technologies without the need of a specific export contract.


If your organisation is involved in the fossil fuel sector and is looking to move into clean energy, learn about the support we can provide with our Transition EDG


What’s more, we can provide direct loans to overseas buyers in support of clean growth projects.

Our products can help UK exporters take advantage of the global appetite for renewable energy by providing specialist support to UK companies and favourable financing to buyers.

Export Finance Managers

UKEF has Export Finance Managers (EFMs) across the UK to help businesses find the finance solutions to compete in a rapidly evolving marketplace.

Our EFMs work closely with locally based bank representatives, industry bodies and businesses to ensure the right support is provided where needed.


Find an Export Finance Manager

For general enquiries, contact your local EFM


Contact an International Export Finance Executive

We also have International Export Finance Executives (IEFEs), who are based in countries around the world, pairing overseas buyers with UK exporters on a range of international projects.

IEFEs work with a dedicated team of underwriters, who understand the nuances of renewable transactions, to provide flexible financing to buyers and help them access world-leading UK renewables expertise.


Find an International Export Finance Executive

For general enquiries, contact an IEFE


Clean Growth Direct Lending Facility

UKEF is positioned as the go-to Export Credit Agency (ECA) for overseas borrowers for clean growth and sustainable finance.

In 2020 we were ranked second by an independent assessment in a league table of ECAs active in sustainable deals.

With a flexible policy on UK content, UKEF can provide direct loans to overseas buyers in support of clean growth projects.

We can consider support for projects in:


  renewable energy
  energy efficiency
  pollution prevention and control
  environmentally sustainable management of living natural resources and land use
  terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity conservation
  clean transportation
  sustainable water and wastewater management
  climate change adaptation
  eco-efficient and/or circular economy adapted products, production technologies and processes
  green buildings



Find out more about the Clean Growth Direct Lending Facility


Clean Growth case studies

Learn more about how UKEF have supported exporters and overseas buyers in the clean growth sector.



Monorails in Cairo

We backed a £1.7 billion deal with Egypt, the largest amount of financing we have ever provided for an overseas infrastructure project.

Read more about the Cairo monorails deal




UKEF supports businesses to build offshore wind farms in Taiwan
UKEF has now provided £500 million in credit guarantees to finance multiple offshore wind farm projects in Taiwan.


  Read more about Formosa 2
  Read more about Greater Changhua 1




Research & Development support for Jaguar-Land Rover in UK
UKEF guaranteed £500 million for a planned £625 million loan facility from commercial banks using our Export Development Guarantee (EDG) - supporting Jaguar Land Rover in the design and manufacture of the next generation of electric vehicles in the UK.

Find out more about the loan guarantee



Healthcare facilities, roads and safe drinking water in Ghana
UKEF financing secured UK involvement in major infrastructure projects across Ghana including solar-powered clean water for 225,000 people.

Read more about our support for UK businesses in Ghana


Get the Exporters’ Edge

Putting the right finance and insurance in place can give you the exporting edge, helping you to win contracts, fulfil orders and get paid.

Tell us about your business






      
        
    Published 21 July 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Export finance

  


  

  


    
  


    