
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Biosensing across wide areas
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA is looking for solutions to detect and locate deposited hazardous biological agents rapidly in the field

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, and Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      6 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 May 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition document: Biosensing across wide areas
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: Biosensing across wide areas
    
        PDF, 433KB, 7 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: Biosensing across wide areas
    
        PDF, 332KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals for innovative technologies that provide an improved way to rapidly detect and locate hazardous biological agents in the field for the benefit of defence and security operations.

Please note this is a Phase 2 competition of a multi-phase theme. It is not compulsory to have been involved in Phase 1 to apply. You should however make yourself aware of the previous competition and the proposals we funded.

Proposals will need to deliver a higher level of maturity than achieved in Phase 1. We expect the starting Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of the innovation to be TRL 3. By the end of the project, we expect the innovation to be sufficiently developed to achieve approximately TRL 4 – 5.

£700k is available to fund Phase 2, which closes for submissions on Monday 15 June 2020 at midday BST.



        
      

      
    Published 6 April 2020
    Last updated 29 May 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 May 2020
              Changing competition closure dates.
            
            
              6 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Defence and Security Accelerator funded contracts
        CDE themed competition: understand and interact with cyberspace
        CDE themed competition: open-source big data insight
        CDE enduring competition
        CDE themed competition: automating cyber defence responses

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    