
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apprenticeships for the school workforce
  

  
  

  
    
  A guide for schools about the benefits of apprenticeships for their workforce, and how the apprenticeship levy and public sector target apply to schools.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      29 June 2018
      Last updated
      
        13 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Apprenticeships for the school workforce
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance is for school leaders, governing bodies, local authorities and academy trusts.

It explains:


  what apprenticeships are
  how schools can benefit from apprenticeships for their workforce
  how the apprenticeship levy applies to schools
  how the public sector apprenticeship target applies to schools
  how schools can access apprenticeship funding if they don’t pay the apprenticeship levy
  how schools can access apprenticeship funding if they are part of a larger employer group, such as a local authority or multi-academy trust


From 1 April 2021, all apprenticeships starting in England must be managed through an apprenticeship service account. This applies to all employers, whether they pay the apprenticeship levy or not.

Employers who pay the apprenticeship levy will have an annual pay bill over £3 million.



        
      

      
    Published 29 June 2018
    Last updated 13 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 July 2021
              Updated section 4.2 of the guidance with a link to the Local Government Association toolkit 'Apprenticeships in schools'.
            
            
              7 June 2021
              Updated the guide throughout and changed it from a PDF to a more accessible HTML document. Updates include adding information about new apprenticeship incentive payments.
            
            
              1 November 2019
              Updated guidance to reflect changes to apprenticeship funding rates and sub-contracting rules.
            
            
              29 June 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Transferring your apprenticeship levy to another business
        Academies: compliance, funding and payments
        School resource management
        Supporting excellent school resource management
        Academies finance and assurance steering group terms of reference

  




      

    Collection

  


        School resource management

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Apprenticeships

  


  

  


    
  


    