
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Military goods, software and technology undertaking template
  

  
  

  
    
  Required supporting documentation if you are registered to use the open general export licence (military goods, software and technology).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      12 December 2012
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology) consignee undertaking template
    
        PDF, 154KB, 4 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Military goods, software and technology undertaking template
    
        ODT, 37.4KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Undertaking template for products licenced for export under the open general export licence military goods, software and technology.

You must be able to demonstrate ‘permitted use’ at compliance audits conducted by the Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU).

The consignee or end-user company receiving the items permitted under the licence terms and conditions must complete the form.

They must confirm:


  how the goods, software or technology will be used
  that the goods will not be re-exported, re-transferred to a destination and/or use outside the scope of the licence
  the goods will not be used for a weapons of mass destruction (WMD) purpose



See notice to exporters 2020/10 on temporary measures in place due to coronavirus (COVID-19) on processing licence applications for information on interim arrangements on signatures and end-user undertakings.





        
      

      
    Published 12 December 2012
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              Form amended to refer to UN, EU, UK or OSCE embargo.
            
            
              24 January 2017
              Added Word version of this document.
            
            
              12 December 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Open general export licences for information security items
        Open individual export licence (OIEL) undertaking template
        Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology)
        End-user undertaking (EUU) form
        Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology: government or NATO end-use)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    