
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Academies chart of accounts and automating the accounts return
  

  
  

  
    
  Financial data structure and guide for automating academy trust financial returns.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      14 May 2019
      Last updated
      
        8 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Quick start guide to automating the academies accounts return and financial statements
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Guide to automating the academies accounts return
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Guide to adopting the academies chart of accounts
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Academies chart of accounts
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 466 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ESFA.GOVUK-ENQUIRIES@education.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Academies chart of accounts: account code guidance
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 5.37 MB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ESFA.GOVUK-ENQUIRIES@education.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
A webinar is available below which introduces the academies chart of account and automation of the accounts return.

Academies chart of account and automation webinar.

Introduction to the chart of accounts

The academies chart of accounts (CoA) is the Department for Education’s (DfE’s) standard for financial data that underpins the academies accounts return and budget forecast returns.

For more information, please view the introductory video below.

Chart of accounts introduction

Introduction to automation

Using the academies CoA, the department has developed automation technology to help reduce the burden of submitting your financial information. This technology enables you to electronically submit your trial balance data directly from your financial management software (FMS) to the department, where it will then be used to pre-populate up to 80% of your accounts return (AR).

For more information on how automation can help in the completion of the academies accounts return and what steps you need to take to use automation, please view the video below.

Automating your Academies Accounts Return

This page includes:


  a guide for academy trusts about adopting the academies chart of accounts, which includes a summary of updates since the previous version released in May 2020
  a spreadsheet with the academies chart of accounts, please refer to the ‘information’ worksheet to find out more about the structure of the chart of accounts
  a spreadsheet providing guidance for each income and expenditure account code within the academies chart of accounts
  a quick start guide to automating the academies accounts return
  a guide for automating the academies accounts return


Introduction to the draft trust financial statements

Trusts who send automated data to populate the accounts return, may also now use this data to produce draft financial statements for the trust. The report is in testing this year, with the aim to obtain feedback ahead of a wider release in autumn 2022.

For more information, please click the following link to the Quick start guide to automating the accounts return and financial statements for more information.

Further enquiries

Chart of accounts enquiries
If you have further questions about the chart of accounts, please contact the DfE using the online enquiry form. Please put “Academies chart of accounts” at the top of your enquiry.

Automation enquiries
If you have further questions about automation, please contact us using the online enquiry form. Please put “Automation/API” at the top of your enquiry.



        
      

      
    Published 14 May 2019
    Last updated 8 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 December 2021
              We have updated this page with additional guidance for downloading automated draft financial statements. This is included within the 'Quick start guide to automating the academies accounts return and financial statements'.
            
            
              18 October 2021
              We have updated the "Quick start guide to automation" and the "Guide to automating the academies accounts return" for the 2020/21 accounts return. We have also updated the "Guide to adopting the academies chart of accounts" to explain the accounting treatment for COVID-19 funding in the 2020/21 accounts return.
            
            
              18 May 2021
              We have updated the academies chart of accounts for financial year September 2021 to August 2022.
            
            
              27 January 2021
              We have updated this page adding a new information video about automating the academies accounts return.
            
            
              17 December 2020
              Sections 3.4 and 3.5 of the chart of accounts guidance has been expanded to include new guidance to help trusts with specific issues raised.
            
            
              4 November 2020
              We have updated this page to add the guide to automation for academies accounts return for 2019/20.
            
            
              6 May 2020
              We have updated the academies chart of accounts for the academic year 2020/21.
            
            
              14 May 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Academies accounts return: guide to using the online form
        Academies budget forecast returns
        Academies budget forecast return: guide to using the online form
        Related party transactions: information for academy trusts
        Academy trust financial management good practice guides

  




      

    Collection

  


        Academies: compliance, funding and payments

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Academy and academy trust finance and reporting

  


  

  


    
  


    