
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    HMCTS services: Social Security and Child Support Tribunal
  

  
  
  
      
  At HMCTS we are using digital services to make tribunals more accessible, efficient and proportionate to the dispute being resolved.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Courts & Tribunals Service

      
      Published
      14 May 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Key statistics

        
        
          Aims and progress

        
        
          What people using our service for SSCS appeals have said

        
        
          Looking ahead in 2021

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The social security and child support (SSCS) project is introducing new technology to the process of appealing benefits decisions made by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). This will allow users to start and progress their appeal online and, where appropriate, have their case decided without the need to attend a tribunal hearing in person.

These new digital systems are designed around the people who use the service, and aim to make processes simpler to understand and quicker to resolve.

Key statistics


  61,547 appeals received by the online Submit Your Appeal service for SSCS tribunals between 9 March 2018 and 31 March 2020
  12,163 pieces of correspondence and evidence scanned by the bulk scanning service for SSCS tribunals - meaning these can also be shared digitally, even when submitted on paper
  86% of people are either ‘satisfied’ or ‘very satisfied’ with Submit Your Appeal  for SSCS tribunals


Aims and progress


  
    
      Objectives
      Achievements
      Outcomes
    
  
  
    
      Provide a service that is digital from start to finish for people appealing a benefit decision. This will allow them to make and manage their appeal online, supported by automated messaging that notifies them immediately of progress and outcomes.
      Created a service on GOV.UK that allows members of the public simply and easily to appeal a decision about benefits online.
      Almost nine out of ten members of the public who have used the online service say they are satisfied or very satisfied with it.
    
    
      Avoid unnecessary delays by removing paper documents from the process wherever possible – making it simpler and quicker to submit and review evidence.
      Provided the DWP with the ability to receive appeals digitally. This now happens in 84% of cases. This automated process massively reduces reliance on photocopying, posting and transporting appeals and minimises manual handling by HMCTS staff.
      When lodged online, an appeal typically takes less than 10 seconds to be uploaded to HMCTS systems and transmitted to DWP, dramatically reducing the 7 days we previously allowed for paper-based appeals.
    
    
      Improve access to justice by resolving cases, where appropriate, without the need for a physical in-person hearing.
      Developed our case management system so that 84% of cases can now be progressed digitally up until they are ready to list for hearing.
      People who prefer to access the tribunal on paper, or who may not be able to use a computer, can still benefit from the speed and flexibility offered by digital ways of working thanks to our bulk scanning operation. This means that applications, evidence and other documents submitted on paper are scanned and then progressed digitally within our system. More than 44,000 SSCS appeals have so far been processed in this way.
    
  




What people using our service for SSCS appeals have said:


  This is a totally new experience for me, and I never thought I could do it by myself, but I am so pleased at how easy it was.



  It’s very clear and I struggle with things like this.



  A million times better than the written appeal process and is better for the environment due to less paper wastage.



  It was easy to use as I was able to state exactly the areas that I wanted to appeal by the prompts given to use. Thank you.



  It is very good, straight forward and I found the online service very helpful thank you.


Looking ahead in 2021

By the end of 2021 for SSCS tribunals we plan to:


  introduce a function that allows a digital case record to be created automatically for most appeals submitted on paper
  introduce the capability to allow audio and video files to be uploaded so they can form part of the digital bundle
  remove the need for new appeals to have a physical case file or photocopied case papers for hearings and replace these with access to the digital case file
  create a feature that will allow for post-hearing applications such as corrections, full statement requests, and permissions to appeal to be handled digitally
  create new ways of working to allow the 16% of SSSC appeals currently processed manually to be entered and progressed digitally






      
        
    Published 14 May 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Social Entitlement Chamber tribunal procedure rules
        How to appeal a decision by DWP (SSCS1A)
        Form SSCS3: Notice of Appeal against a decision of the Department for Work and Pensions - Compensation Recovery Unit
        HMCTS reform programme projects explained
        The HMCTS reform programme

  




      

    Collection

  


        HMCTS Reform Programme: fact sheets

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Courts, sentencing and tribunals
        Justice system transparency

  


  

  


    
  


    