
								



The United States and Australia have signed a landmark 
statement 
of intent to cooperate and share in the enormous opportunities and benefits that world-leading quantum science and technology advancements present.
The 
Joint Statement of the United States of America and Australia on Cooperation in Quantum Science and Technology
 strengthens Australia and the United States’ ability to exchange quantum knowledge and skills.
The statement creates more opportunities to promote research and development, and encourages greater market access for quantum businesses in both nations.
The President’s Science Advisor and Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy Dr. Eric Lander signed the joint statement in Washington.
“I am delighted to affirm the United States and Australia’s commitment to work together to develop a healthy international marketplace for quantum technologies and grow the workforce for this emerging area,” 
Dr. Lander said. 
“Jointly exploring new frontiers in quantum information science will accelerate discoveries and enable revolutionary approaches to computing, sensing, and networking that will benefit all of society.”
Minister for Science and Technology Melissa Price said signing the joint statement recognizes the role quantum will have in helping solve global challenges. 
“As a critical technology that will shape our world for years to come, quantum technology offers incredible opportunities for Australia and the United States,” 
Minister Price said. 
“This joint statement with the United States builds on our already strong strategic partnership when it comes to science and technology and will help us build a quantum future together. ” 
“Quantum technologies will help us overcome significant challenges that current computers struggle to solve, will help make our day-to-day lives safer and more convenient, and create more secure communications technologies. This is an important step forward for advancing quantum technologies in both Australia and the US, and will create more opportunities for Australian business and researchers to leverage the opportunities this technology will create.”
A copy of the joint statement can be found 
here
.

			