
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Ultrasound gel: good infection prevention practice
  

  
  

  
    
  This is guidance on the safe use of ultrasound gel to reduce risk of transmission of infection during ultrasound and related procedures.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Health Security Agency

      
      Published
      15 January 2021
      Last updated
      
        10 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Good infection prevention practice: using ultrasound gel
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Standard ultrasound gel is not produced as a sterile product, although sterile versions are available. This document provides guidance on the safe use of ultrasound gel to reduce the risk of transmission of infection arising from these products.

This replaces interim guidance first published by Public Health England (PHE) in January 2021 and is an outcome of close collaboration between the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) and key stakeholders with expertise relating to the use of ultrasound. This updated guidance clarifies the aims, implications and user groups targeted. It includes additional guidance on scenarios when sterile gel is recommended and which types of gel containers should be used.



        
      

      
    Published 15 January 2021
    Last updated 10 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 November 2021
              Added latest update.
            
            
              12 February 2021
              Updated guidance on which type of ultrasound gel to use and when to use them. Added guidance on using non-sterile gel and discarding reusable bottles.
            
            
              15 January 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        SIN Japan assists first ESRC-JST Joint Call for £3m on AI and Society
        Defra engagement with the tobacco industry on litter

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Patient safety
        Infectious diseases

  


  

  


    
  


    