

Exploring how workplace financial interventions can support the mental health of young people
Adobe Stock
Participation in workplace financial wellbeing interventions is associated with better mental health, particularly amongst certain subgroups of workers, according to survey data from healthiest workplace competitions. What is the issue?
The relationship between poor financial wellbeing and anxiety and depression is well recognised. A high proportion of young workers globally report having financial concerns, an issue which is exacerbated by the financial impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Workplace financial wellbeing interventions could offer a key means for addressing rising financial concerns and mental health issues in the workplace.How did we help?
RAND Europe was commissioned by the Wellcome trust to support its mental health programme strategy, which aims to transform how we understand, fund, prevent and treat anxiety and depression in young people by creating a mental health priority area. Using data from the Britain’s Healthiest Workplace (BHW) and Asia’s Healthiest Workplace (AHW) surveys and a rapid evidence assessment, the study outlines the likely impact of workplace financial wellbeing interventions on preventing and addressing anxiety and depression in young people.
The study followed a broad approach to help provide a better understanding of the contexts, communities and groups within which these interventions are promising.What did we find?
Through our analysis of BHW and AHW data of employees, we found that participation is associated with better mental health, particularly amongst certain subgroups. 
Across both BHW and AHW samples, a stronger association between participation and mental health is found amongst 18-24 year olds and those with low incomes. In the UK sample this extends to workers who do not have a university degree, are from an ethic minority background, or believe there is discrimination in the workplace. This highlights the potential role of these interventions in addressing the mental health of young workers in these groups.What do we recommend?
Our findings suggest that workplace financial wellbeing interventions are a potentially promising approach, but overall, evidence of the effectiveness of these interventions on the mental health of young workers is lacking and there is a pressing need for further evidence.
Employers should consider implementing workplace financial wellbeing interventions, and we provide recommendations to support this process. These include focusing on topics and skills identified as important by young people and developing strategies to enable access and encourage participation. Furthermore, interventions should be tailored to the needs and characteristics of individuals and groups and targeted at those most in need. 

Project team



Christian Van Stolk
Executive Vice President, RAND Europe


Christian van Stolk is executive vice president at RAND Europe. He has worked extensively on health and wellbeing in the workplace. His research in the past has focused on improving the health and wellbeing of staff in the National Health Service in the UK, maintaining and gaining employment for…



Jennifer Bousfield
Analyst


Jenny Bousfield is an analyst at RAND Europe with research experience in a range of health and social care topics. This includes health services research, such as work on quality improvement and innovation. Most recently, she has been involved in research on mental health in schools, and anxiety…



Camilla d'Angelo
 Analyst


Camilla d’Angelo is an analyst at RAND Europe working on science and technology policy. She has a particular interest in researching new and emerging science and technology and their wider societal impacts. She holds a Ph.D. in experimental psychology from the University of Cambridge and a B.Sc.…



William D. Phillips
Analyst


Will Phillips (he/him) is an analyst at RAND Europe working in the area of health and wellbeing research. His work has spanned a range of topics including transport, education and health and wellbeing. His primary research interest is in mental health and workpace wellbeing research. He…




