
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Intellectual property rights in Indonesia
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance on how to protect and enforce your intellectual property rights when trading in Indonesia.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Intellectual Property Office

      
      Published
      14 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Indonesia: IP rights enforcement manual
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Links for business

IPO Representative - the IPO has appointed an IP attaché, based in the British High Commission in Singapore, to cover the UK’s key southeast Asian markets alongside representatives from Department for International Trade and the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO). The position is central to the government’s plans to enhance trade relations and to support IP and innovation-led businesses abroad.

British businesses looking for access to intellectual property advice and support should email Desmond.Tan@fco.gov.uk.

The Department for International Trade - works with UK-based businesses to ensure their success in international markets, and encourage the best overseas companies to look to the UK as their global partner of choice.

UK-ASEAN Business Council (UKABC) - helps UK businesses looking to find out more about the opportunities in the region, and those wanting to start doing business there.

British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) - is a network of chambers of commerce across the UK and provides a variety of business advice, services and support to its members. The BCC helps businesses at every stage, including start-up, development and growth. They also offer advice to businesses looking to enter international markets.

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) - are an executive agency of the United Nations and are responsible for IP rights internationally. Their website includes information on what IP protection is available internationally and tips on how to apply.

World Trade Organization (WTO) - run by its member states, they negotiate agreements to enhance international trade, with a vision to increase economic growth and development. It also provides a legal framework for these trade agreements and to settle disputes that arise.

For further IP guidance to other Southeast Asian markets, see the ASEAN helpdesk’s country factsheets.




        
      

      
    Published 14 June 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    