
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Government Social Research: Publication protocol
  

  
  

  
    
  Protocol defines principles for the publication of all government social research that is not defined as official or national statistics. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Civil Service and Government Social Research Profession

      
      Published
      1 June 2015
      Last updated
      
        16 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Government Social Research: Publication Protocol
    
        PDF, 385 KB, 22 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publiccorrespondence@cabinet-office.gsi.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The protocol details the five principles that should be adhered to in the publication and release of all government social research products and are consistent with the Code of Practice for Statistics, which is statutory.  It clearly sets out how social research conducted by or for government should be released; who should be responsible for the release; the timing of the release and the independence of the research. Compliance with this protocol will help ensure that evidence produced by government is released into the public domain in a manner that promotes public confidence and scientific rigour.


  Principle 1. The products of government social research and analysis will be made publicly available.
  Principle 2: There will be prompt release of all government social research and analysis, including advance publication of research protocols and analysis plans
  Principle 3. Government social research and analysis must be released in a way that promotes public trust.
  Principle 4. Clear communication plans should be developed and maintained for all social research and analysis produced by government
  Principle 5. Responsibility for the release of social research and analysis produced by government must be clear.


The protocol applies to government departments in England and Wales that conduct or commission social research; the Scottish Government procedures for publishing social research are compliant with this protocol.  Non-departmental public bodies and agencies are not obliged to follow the protocol, although as it is a statement of good practice for the publication of social research and analysis, compliance is encouraged.

This update builds on and supersedes the GSR Publication Protocol published in 2015, and is signed off by Jenny Dibden (Head of GSR), Professor Sir Ian Diamond (National Statistician & Head of the Analysis Function) and Sir Patrick Vallance (UK Government Chief Scientific Adviser & Head of the Government Science & Engineering Profession).



        
      

      
    Published 1 June 2015
    Last updated 16 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 December 2021
              Updated Protocol
            
            
              1 June 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Research at DfT
        Cycling infrastructure: framework for evaluating economic and social impacts
        Transport social research and evaluation reports: 2004 to 2010
        Impact of health and disability on travel behaviour of older people
        Using behavioural insights to increase uptake of electric vehicles in the UK

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability
        Civil service reform

  


  

  


    
  


    