
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    The technology code of practice
  

  
  
  
      
  The technology code of practice is a set of criteria to help government design, build and buy technology.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      14 July 2021
      Last updated
      
        10 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Spend controls

        
        
          1. Define user needs

        
        
          2. Make things accessible and inclusive

        
        
          3. Be open and use open source

        
        
          4. Make use of open standards

        
        
          5. Use cloud first

        
        
          6. Make things secure

        
        
          7. Make privacy integral

        
        
          8. Share, reuse and collaborate

        
        
          9. Integrate and adapt technology

        
        
          10. Make better use of data

        
        
          11. Define your purchasing strategy

        
        
          12. Make your technology sustainable

        
        
          13. Meet the Service Standard

        
        
          Contacts

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The technology code of practice (TCoP) is a cross-government agreed standard used for the  Cabinet Office spend control process and the Local Digital Declaration.


The Central Digital and Data Office (CDDO) is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


You should use the TCoP for all of your technology projects or programmes. Consider each point, align your project or programme with the mandatory points, and follow as many of the remaining points as is practical. You’ll get the most benefit by aligning your organisation’s technology and business strategies to the Technology Code of Practice.

Each point contains guidance and links to case studies to help you migrate from legacy infrastructure and manage the full lifecycle of your technology.

Spend controls

Use the TCoP during the spend controls process

You must consider all points of the TCoP as part of the Cabinet Office spend control process. If your project or programme needs spend control approval you should contact the Standards Assurance team at  gdsapprovals@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk  for guidance with the approvals process.

Where legacy technology limits your ability to adhere to the TCoP, you must explain this to the Standards Assurance team.

1. Define user needs

Understand your users and their needs. Develop knowledge of your users and what that means for your technology project or programme.

Read more about TCoP point 1 - Define user needs.

2. Make things accessible and inclusive

Make sure your technology, infrastructure and systems are accessible and inclusive for all users.

Read more about TCoP point 2 - Make things accessible.

3. Be open and use open source

Publish your code and use open source software to improve transparency, flexibility and accountability.

Read more about TCoP point 3 - Be open and use open source.

4. Make use of open standards

Build technology that uses open standards to ensure your technology works and communicates with other technology, and can easily be upgraded and expanded.

Read more about TCoP point 4 - Make use of open standards.

5. Use cloud first

Consider using public cloud solutions first as stated in the Cloud First policy.

Read more about TCoP point 5 - Use cloud first.

6. Make things secure

Keep systems and data safe with the appropriate level of security.

Read more about TCoP point 6 - Make things secure.

7. Make privacy integral

Make sure users rights are protected by integrating privacy as an essential part of your system.

Read more about TCoP point 7 - Make privacy integral.

8. Share, reuse and collaborate

Avoid duplicating effort and unnecessary costs by collaborating across government and sharing and reusing technology, data, and services.

Read more about TCoP point 8 - Share, reuse and collaborate.

9. Integrate and adapt technology

Your technology should work with existing technologies, processes and infrastructure in your organisation, and adapt to future demands.

Read more about TCoP point 9 - Integrate and adapt technology.

10. Make better use of data

Use data more effectively by improving your technology, infrastructure and processes.

Read more about TCoP point 10 - Make better use of data.

11. Define your purchasing strategy

Your purchasing strategy must show you’ve considered commercial and technology aspects, and contractual limitations.

Read more about TCoP point 11 - Define your purchasing strategy.

12. Make your technology sustainable

Increase sustainability throughout the lifecycle of your technology.

Read more about TCoP point 12 - Make your technology sustainable.

13. Meet the Service Standard

If you’re building a service as part of your technology project or programme you will also need to meet the  Service Standard

Contacts

Who to contact for help

Standards Assurance team

gdsapprovals@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk

You can email for help with:


  implementing the Technology Code of Practice
  designing an appropriate strategy for breaking up large systems and services
  evaluating the maturity of the technology market you want to buy from
  identifying opportunities to use common government platforms and components


Crown Commercial Service

info@crowncommercial.gov.uk

You can email for help with buying commodity services through procurement frameworks.

Technology Policy Team

You can give feedback to the Technology Policy team or ask questions about the Technology Code of Practice at  technology-policy@digital.cabinet-office.gov.uk




      
        
    Published 14 July 2021
    Last updated 10 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 November 2021
              Addition of a new point 12 - 'Make your technology sustainable'. Moved 'Meet the Service Standard' to point 13.
            
            
              14 July 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Government technology standards and guidance
        How Hackney Council built an API Platform
        Define user needs
        Make things accessible and inclusive
        Make better use of data

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    