
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Badgers, beavers, otters, pine martens and stoats: how to trap humanely
  

  
  
  
      
  Trappers of certain species of mammal must use traps that meet international humaneness standards.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Natural England and Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      5 April 2019
      Last updated
      
        10 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Certified traps

        
        
          Uncertified traps

        
        
          Apply for a licence

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
You must use a trap that meets the humaneness standards of the Agreement on International Humane Trapping Standards (AIHTS) to trap the following species of mammal:


  badger
  beaver
  otter
  pine marten
  stoat


You also need a licence from Natural England to trap any of these species.

The trap must be suitable for use in England and be either:


  a certified make and model
  an approved design


You can also apply for a licence to use an uncertified trap which you believe is suitable for the humane trapping of the target species. If you use an uncertified trap you must assess the welfare of every animal you trap.

Certified traps

The following traps are certified and are suitable for use in England.

Badger


  Albi Traps ALBI 017M large mammal trap
  Animal and Plant Health Agency badger cage trap
  Welsh Government badger cage trap


Beaver


  Bavarian type beaver trap
  Comstock beaver trap
  Breathe Easy live beaver trap
  EZee Set live catch beaver trap
  Hancock live beaver trap
  Koro live beaver trap


You can only use the Bavarian type beaver trap on dry land. Natural England will normally only grant licences to use this trap.

You can only use the other certified live-capture traps listed for beavers in water. These traps carry a greater risk to the welfare of the beaver and safety of the trapper. Natural England will consider licence applications for these traps but would only grant a licence to use one in exceptional circumstances.

Pine marten


  Tomahawk live traps model 205
  Tomahawk live traps model 206NC


Stoat


  DOC 150 body grip kill trap
  DOC 200 body grip kill trap
  DOC 250 body grip kill trap
  Tully Trap body grip kill trap
  Goodnature A24 rat and stoat captive bolt kill trap
  Perdix spring trap body grip kill trap
  Perdix mink live capture cage trap


To get a list of traps certified in other countries for humane trapping contact the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. The list includes links to the certifying authorities’ best practice guidance.

Uncertified traps

You can apply for a licence to use an uncertified trap which is suitable for the humane trapping of the target species.

A condition of the licence is that a suitably qualified person must assess the welfare of the trapped animal with each use of the trap.

A suitably qualified person is someone with the knowledge and experience to look for, recognise and assess the AIHTS indicators of poor welfare.

They’ll need to:


  assess if the trapped animal shows any of the AIHTS indicators of poor welfare
  decide if the trap caused these
  send a report of the assessment to Natural England



AIHTS indicators of poor welfare

The AIHTS lists 2 behaviours and 14 injuries that indicate poor welfare in trapped animals.

The 2 behaviour indicators are:


  self-biting leading to severe injury
  excessive immobility and unresponsiveness


The 14 injury indicators are:


  fracture
  joint dislocation close to the carpus (wrist) or tarsus (ankle) bones
  severed tendon or ligament
  major periosteal (bone covering membrane) abrasion
  severe external haemorrhage (bleeding) or haemorrhage into an internal cavity
  major skeletal muscle degeneration
  restriction in blood supply to a limb
  fracture of a permanent tooth exposing pulp cavity
  eye damage including corneal laceration
  spinal cord injury
  severe internal organ damage
  myocardial (heart muscle) degeneration
  amputation
  death


What to do if the animal is fit for release

If the trapped animal is fit for release, the person making the assessment (the assessor) must decide if the trap has caused any injuries. They must report these to Natural England using the report form sent out with the licence.

What to do if the animal is not fit for release

If the assessor believes the animal is not fit for release due to any of the AIHTS indicators of poor welfare, they must take further action.

A qualified person (such as a vet) must anaesthetise or euthanise the animal for further medical assessment and, if appropriate, treatment.

If they need to euthanise an animal protected from killing, they must be able to rely on a suitable ‘mercy killing’ legal defence.

The assessor must decide if the trap caused the injuries and report these to Natural England using the report form.

Apply for a licence

You need to use the application form relevant to the species and activity:


  badger
  otter: to capture and transport those trapped in fisheries to prevent damage (CL36)
  pine marten: for survey, research or conservation work (A29)
  beaver: in relation to damage and public health and safety (A05)
  beaver: for science, education or conservation (A30)
  stoat






      
        
    Published 5 April 2019
    Last updated 10 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 September 2021
              Adding additional guidance on beaver traps.
            
            
              31 January 2021
              Perdix spring trap has been added to the list of permitted use of traps for live capture of stoat.
            
            
              31 March 2020
              Stoats added to list of species covered by humane trapping rules.
            
            
              5 April 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Stoats: licence to trap them to prevent serious damage to livestock (GL39)
        Stoats: licence to trap them to conserve wild birds (GL38)
        Stoat licences
        Mammals: licence to kill, take or disturb for health and safety (A05 and LR05)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Wildlife and habitat conservation
        Protected sites and species

  


  

  


    
  


    