 — The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) today announced $45 million in funding for 12 projects to advance point-source carbon capture and storage technologies that can capture at least 95% of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions generated from natural gas power and industrial facilities that produce commodities like cement and steel. These research and development, front-end engineering design and engineering-scale projects are a part of DOE’s efforts to deploy a portfolio of innovative solutions to help achieve the Biden-Harris Administration’s goals of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 and a 100% clean electricity sector by 2035.“In order to dramatically reduce carbon pollution in our fight against climate change, we must deploy all of the tools at our disposal, including the innovative technologies that capture CO2 emissions before they reach the atmosphere,” said . “What’s truly exciting about these projects is that not only do they put us on a path to decarbonize existing infrastructure, but they also pave the way for good-paying, union jobs—in the communities that have been impacted the most from our dependence on fossil fuels.”Point-source carbon capture seeks to stop carbon dioxide emissions from entering the atmosphere by filtering out CO2 and other harmful gases from a power plant or industrial facility. Once deployed at a commercial scale, carbon capture can help create jobs in economically distressed power plant and industrial communities. This DOE investment puts the nation one step closer to responsible demonstration and commercialization of this technology, leading to large dollar investments in communities surrounding these facilities.These 12 projects were selected by DOE’s Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM) and fit under three areas of interest: (1) carbon capture research and development, (2) engineering-scale testing of carbon capture technologies and (3) engineering design studies for carbon capture systems. DOE’s National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) will manage the selected projects:“These projects demonstrate Colorado’s leadership in advancing innovative solutions to climate change while sustaining high quality jobs,” said . “Climate change is an urgent crisis that demands an all-of-the-above approach. Investing in carbon capture will advance technological solutions, bring costs down, and cut emissions in order to prevent the worst effects of climate change.”A detailed list of the selected projects and their associated areas of interest can be found .FECM funds research, development, demonstration and deployment projects to decarbonize power generation and industrial sources, to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and to mitigate the environmental impacts of fossil fuel use. To learn more, visit the , sign up for FECM news announcements and visit the.  ###