
      


  
    


  
  
    The GSMA Innovation Fund for Climate Resilience and Adaptation
  

  
  
  
    
  The GSMA Innovation Fund for Climate Resilience and Adaptation will support digital innovations that enable the world’s most vulnerable populations to adapt, anticipate and absorb the negative impacts of climate change.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      15 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Funds: 
      Open
      Countries: 
      
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Congo (Democratic Republic), Cook Islands, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, East Timor, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, The, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Laos, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, St Lucia, St Vincent, Swaziland, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Zambia, Zimbabwe

      Sector: 
      
Climate change, Innovation, Private sector/business, Technology

      Eligible organisations: 
      
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs), Companies, Organisations based in Low to Middle Income Countries (LMIC)

      Value of funding: 
      £100,001 to £500,000
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          What the fund will achieve

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Background information on the fund

        
        
          Contacts

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

Closing date for applications 11:59pm UTC on 9 January 2022.


Overview
The GSMA Innovation Fund will help accelerate the testing, adoption and scalability of digital innovations that enable the world’s most vulnerable populations to adapt, anticipate and absorb the negative impacts of climate change. The Fund will provide 15 to 18 month grants and additional support to for-profit small and growing enterprises, including start-ups, that leverage digital technology, especially mobile, to deliver climate resilience and adaptation solutions.

What the fund will achieve
The Fund will support grant projects delivering climate resilience and adaptation solutions. Climate resilience and adaptation solutions are defined as those that help to build individual, community or institutional capacities to:


  adapt to multiple, long-term and future climate change risks
  anticipate and reduce the impact of climate variability and extremes through preparedness and planning
  absorb (i.e. face and manage) adverse conditions, emergencies or disasters


The objective of the Fund is to test and generate insights from innovative use cases, partnerships and business models in selected geographies, in order to improve the sustainability and scalability of digital enabled solutions that make a positive impact on low-income populations and those who are most vulnerable to current or future climate risks.

For more information on eligibility, read the GSMA’s terms and conditions and frequently asked questions

How to apply
To apply for the Fund, complete the online application form by 11:59pm UTC on 9 January 2022.

Background information on the fund

The Fund is open to applicants whose projects are implemented in countries that are eligible to receive Official Development Assistance in:


  Africa
  South and South East Asia eg. ASEAN
  Pacific Islands
  The Caribbean


Additional due diligence checks and eligibility screenings may be required in certain markets. For these markets, applicants must be registered and operating in the country of project implementation.

Contacts
The Fund is managed and run by the GSMA. An independent Fund Manager, Palladium International Ltd, plays a managerial, compliance and advisory role, executing decisions on behalf of the Fund.

If you have questions related to the Fund, visit the GSMA website or email GSMAIF@gsma.com.





      

      
        
    Published 15 November 2021


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        UK Aid Connect
        Technology Provider Registration for Frontier Technologies
        Assistive Technology Impact Fund
        Global Innovation Fund
        Emergency Humanitarian Response Zambia

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        International aid and development

  


  

  


    
  


    