
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Assessment process and criteria
  

  
  
  
      
  This guidance explains our competition process and how your proposal is assessed.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator and Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      8 December 2016
      Last updated
      
        28 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Competition process

        
        
          Assessment criteria

        
        
          Resubmission

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
At the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA), we have a very thorough process for deciding which proposals to fund. The below guidance sets out our full competition process including the guidance given to our assessors to assess proposals.

Competition process

The competition process is made up of ten steps.

1. Competition opens
All competitions are launched on our Apply for funding page. If you are interested in submitting an idea for any competition, please Contact a DASA Innovation Partner to help you.


Sign up to the DASA Mailing List

Be the first to hear about new competitions, upcoming events and other DASA news. To join the DASA Mailing List, please send your name and organisation name to this email address:accelerator@dstl.gov.uk


2. Proposal submission

The only way to submit a proposal to DASA is online via our Enterprise Collaboration Service(ECS).  Login or register for an account.

Some tips to help with your submission:


  before submitting your proposal, check DASA’s standard terms and conditions carefully to ensure that you agree with all of them. You may wish to check them with your commercial or legal department
  draft your proposal offline to avoid losing material when submitting online
  be concise. Each assessor should be able to read, understand and assess your proposal within 1 hour and 30 minutes, unless otherwise stated in the competition document
  only click submit when your proposal is complete. It is not possible to add any additional information to your proposal after it has been submitted
  submit your proposal well before the deadline in case you experience any technical problems. The deadline is the deadline and will not be extended. If you are having problems submitting your proposal, email us prior to the deadline on accelerator@dstl.gov.uk or call 01980 950000 option 3


3. Competition close

4. Pre sift

Once you have submitted your proposal, it will pass through an initial sift. At this stage, your proposal may be rejected if it:


  does not demonstrate impact for defence or security
  does not outline how it meets the scope of the competition
  is incomplete
  is lacking technical information to allow technical assessment to take place
  does not demonstrate how the project can be completed in the timelines
  exceeds the funding limit or timescale stipulated
  does not demonstrate acceptance of or comply with DASA terms and conditions

  is not at the correct Technology Readiness Level (TRL) for the competition
  is a resubmission of a previous proposal and does not adhere to the resubmission guidelines



Further guidance on pre sift criteria is described in the online submission service for the specific competition and in the relevant competition document, accessible via the Apply for Funding page.

5. Assessment
After the initial sifting process, experts from across UK government will be assigned to assess your proposal.  When people outside of UK Government are used for assessment, it will be under a non-disclosure agreement and details will be provided in advance in the relevant competition document.

During the assessment phase all proposals are assessed against the following criteria:


  desirable: strategic fit, end user support/pull
  feasible: technical credibility, innovation, risk, expertise of team/capability
  viable: costs and value for money, project delivery/plan


Further guidance on assessment criteria is listed below.

6. Moderation
After assessment, a moderator will compile an overview of all assessments, pulling together comments to provide a collective outcome in the form of a ‘Fund’ or ‘No Fund’ recommendation against the proposal.

7. Challenge
Stakeholders/moderators  are invited to challenge the ‘Fund’ or ‘No Fund recommendation made against each proposal. Challengers should present their argument both in written form for circulation and at the decision conference.

8. Decision conference
Key stakeholders come together to discuss the recommendations. The moderator attends the decision conference to present the ‘Fund’ or No Fund’ recommendation for the proposal and to defend the proposal against any challenges that may have been submitted. Challengers attend the decision conference to present their challenges in order to promote robust discussion prior to the ‘Fund’ or ‘No Fund’ decision being made. At the end of the decision conference, a decision is made against each proposal on whether to fund it.

9. Decision release
You’ll be able to track the progress of your application through the submission service on your dashboard. You’ll be notified by email when we’ve made a decision on whether or not to fund your proposal.

Suppliers who receive a ‘Fund’ decision will be contacted by DASA commercial to answer any clarification questions and finalise the contracts.  If you have questions regarding your contract, contact DASACommercial@dstl.gov.uk.

10. Feedback release
Moderators provide feedback for ‘No Fund’ proposals which is subsequently reviewed by DASA and released by the commercial team.

Please note that every DASA competition has a finite financial limit which affects the number of bids we can fund. There may be occasions where additional funding subsequently becomes available, after a decision has been released. DASA reserves the right to keep proposals ‘in reserve’ for 12 months. In the event that additional funding becomes available, DASA may ask whether you would still be prepared to undertake the work outlined in your proposal under the same terms.

Assessment criteria

DASA uses three baseline assessment criteria; desirable, feasible and viable. The baseline criteria apply to all our competitions, unless stated in the competition document. It is important to note that criteria may be adjusted or weighted differently across competitions in accordance with the needs of Government customers. You should check the specific guidance that is provided within the competition document on the Apply for Funding page.

Once the criteria have been published for a particular competition, they will remain frozen for the duration of that competition.

Corresponding guidance on what we need to see in the various sections of your proposal is provided in the proposal template on our on-line submission service.

In order to give you the best chance of success, please find below guidance on the three baseline criteria that is provided to our assessors in order to assess your proposals.

Desirable

DASA funds innovations that solve defence and security challenges. You should look out for things like the proposal’s alignment with a strategic need or challenge and who would benefit from the innovation. Ideas that are useful for both defence and security should be acknowledged.

Under this category, proposals should be assessed on:

Defence and security compatibility.


  the proposal shows benefit across defence and/or security sectors.


Strategic fit


  the proposal is clear on the business need, technological challenge or market opportunity driving the innovation.
  the proposal describes the impact for defence and/or security in terms of performance, time and cost
  the proposal has a clear link to a user need or challenge.  This may be the challenge as specified in the competition document


End user pull


  the proposal identifies who would benefit from and exploit the innovation if successful
  the proposal outlines how the proposer expects to take the solution to market on completion of the project and who the appropriate partners would be to do so. This may include information on further phases of development or funding required for the solution to reach an appropriate TRL for procurement


Feasible

You should assess whether the idea has a good chance of success technically.

You are asked to consider whether the proposal is scientifically, technically and practically feasible, how innovative the idea is, and how it compares with potential alternatives. A clear and logical plan, backed by relevant expertise, capability and appropriate resources needs to be present.

Under this category, proposals should be assessed on:

Technical Credibility


  the proposal is scientifically, technically and practically feasible
  the proposal has a robust testing regime with clear and quantifiable measures of progress and performance


Innovation and risk


  the proposal assesses how the solution compares to alternative solutions in terms of time, cost and performance
  the proposal assesses and provides mitigations for technical risks - to note DASA welcomes proposals that are high risk, high reward, but mitigations should be explained thoroughly


Expertise and capability


  the proposal provides evidence of the team’s relevant expertise and experience in the technical area of the innovation, including background research and projects completed
  the proposal provides evidence of the resources available to the team to deliver the project including facilities and labour


Viable

You should assess for evidence that the idea can be delivered within the project scope and timelines.

Look for evidence of a robust project plan which identifies any links or dependencies between work packages and milestones, and which clearly identifies measurable deliverables. We are looking at overall costs and value for money. Finally, please look at the proposer’s plans to take their innovation forward beyond the project.

Under this category, proposals should be assessed on:

Project Delivery


  the proposal has a project plan in sufficient detail and identifies any links or dependencies between work packages and/or milestones
  the proposal identifies any project risks or dependencies and has identified appropriate mitigations
  the proposal identifies any need for Government Furnished Assets (GFA) (including Government Furnished Information (GFI)). Should GFA not be granted, the proposal identifies suitable alternatives
  the proposal identifies any legal or ethical concerns including MODREC approval, RIPA, data protection and has put in place appropriate steps and timescales to heed these considerations


Costs and Value for Money


  the proposal provides detail on the total project cost, and the profiling of spend across milestones and does so in line with DASA financial terms and conditions

  the proposal explains what alternative sources of funding have been considered and what funding would be sought should the proposal be unsuccessful
  the proposal provides information on any additional funding or in-kind support that has been or is being provided by anyone other than the proposer
  the proposal explains what would happen to the innovation if it were not publicly funded
  the proposal describes the benefit and value for money for government, and also explains any wider value to the UK economy


Plan Beyond the Project


  the proposal outlines what funding and/or customer support is potentially available to develop and incorporate the outcomes of this project
  the proposal explains what tests, accreditation, trials would be necessary to take the project forward on completion of the project
  the proposal considers how the outcomes could be integrated into existing systems and capabilities or outlines the solution that it would be replacing and why
  the proposal estimates the long term cost of further development of the solution and any potential pricing models for procurement.


Resubmission

If your proposal was unsuccessful
If you have previously submitted a proposal which was unsuccessful, please do not resubmit this proposal, unless your feedback specifically requests it.

If you were asked to resubmit your proposal, please ensure you indicate how you have addressed ALL the feedback given.  Please also include your previous proposal number in your submission.

If you were previously unsuccessful and would like to submit a new proposal, which is similar in any way to your previous proposals, please contact us at accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.

If you have previously submitted this proposal to any other government funding body, please include details in your submission. If you were not funded, please attach the feedback with your proposal. If you were funded, please detail how our funding will offer value for money for government.

If your proposal was successful
If you have previously submitted a proposal and were successful, but did not agree to DASA contract terms and conditions, please do not resubmit this proposal. Should you wish to now accept the contract terms and conditions, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.


Submit a proposal

Read the terms and conditions






      
        
    Published 8 December 2016
    Last updated 28 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 April 2021
              Removed the following line as it is not required - “Evidence of end user buy-in for the idea is welcomed” under the "Desirable" heading.
            
            
              26 April 2021
              Removed the following line "Evidence of end user buy-in for the idea is welcomed" under the "Desirable" heading, such evidence is no longer desirable.
            
            
              31 March 2021
              Removed reference to letter of support as evidence of support.
            
            
              12 March 2021
              Updated resubmission guidance.
            
            
              20 March 2020
              Added competition process guidance and further guidance on the assessment criteria as used by our assessors
            
            
              1 August 2018
              We have added some clarification on how we assess your proposals.
            
            
              20 June 2018
              We have changed our assessment criteria for future competitions.
            
            
              8 December 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Contact a DASA Innovation Partner
        Submit a proposal
        DASA Standard Terms and Conditions
        Defence and Security Accelerator: ethical, legal and regulatory guidance

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Submit a proposal

  




      

    Collection

  


        Login or register for an account
        Apply For Funding

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Armed forces and Ministry of Defence reform
        National security
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    