    



 during the COVID-19 crisis may look to the last recession for strategies for dealing with downturn, but the current situation is unique in many ways—and the stakes are far higher. In this article, we lay out the profound challenges facing the distribution industry, share insights from previous downturns, and explain the steps distributors must now take to outperform competitors during the recovery and beyond.Navigating the new landscape by studying the pastThe COVID-19 pandemic has made life infinitely more difficult for people and businesses of every description. Despite the efforts of governments, industry, scientists, and healthcare workers, some major markets remain at least partially closed, many supply chains face serious disruptions, and most sectors experience continued low demand. No one can be certain when workers or shoppers will return.Many  leaders face a difficult conundrum. Continuing business as usual may put employees in harm’s way or cede ground to suppliers that are increasingly harnessing digital tools to serve customers directly. But the best improvement strategies are unclear. More than six months into the pandemic, companies are still trying to deliver value while protecting people’s safety and livelihoods.To gain deeper insights into the best strategies for dealing with the pandemic, we studied how some companies stayed resilient in previous crises and identified lessons that may be relevant today. We also assessed the pandemic’s impact, including trends affecting the distribution industry. Our analysis identified how leaders can stabilize operations and take a through-cycle view to gain competitive advantages. These steps will help them reimagine the future as we enter the next normal.
		
	
A downturn with new twistsIn this unprecedented crisis, while every marketplace and distributor faces unique challenges, most businesses fall into one of the following three categories based on their demand volume:
    
    
    
Despite the day-and-night variability of the distribution business across sectors, we urge all distributors to take a through-cycle view of this crisis, learn from previous downturns, understand what has changed, and take swift action to survive the crisis while preparing for a recovery in the next normal.

	




    
    

Looking back: Lessons from previous crisesDistributors play critical roles across sectors and are therefore rocked by drops in overall GDP and sector-specific shocks. Building-product distribution, for example, was hit hard by the Great Recession, as the housing industry collapsed in the United States. Other sectors also faced demand slowdowns as GDP plunged.Our analysis of around 100 publicly traded global distributors shows a significant drop in revenue and margin at the height of the Great Recession. In 2009, their year-on-year revenue growth was about –7 percent across sectors, and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) fell by as much as 40 percent (Exhibit 1). The impact of the recession was particularly acute in the automotive, building-product, and home-furnishing sectors. Across the board, however, distributors struggled to recover the lost margins even as top-line growth recovered. On average, it took them nearly a decade to recover their prerecession margins. Moreover, publicly traded distributors saw a sharp decline in stock prices and total return to shareholders as overall demand softened.
    
The current downturn may resemble the Great Recession, given declines in demand, consumer buying power, and stock prices, but the changes occurred much more suddenly in 2020. The stock prices of food-service distributors, for example, dropped by more than 50 percent in a matter of weeks rather than months. For many distributors, the need to protect the health of employees, customers, and business partners while managing profound supply-chain disruptions has created a perfect storm.That said, we believe that history provides valuable lessons. For many distributors, the responses that worked in previous recessions are now table stakes. In our analysis of the approximately 100 publicly traded distributors, we looked at their performance and actions through the previous recession. We found that some companies increased revenues and margins faster than peers did and provided shareholders with nearly double the returns of average competitors (Exhibit 2).
    

    
How did they do this? Looking into the strategies of high-performing distributors, we found that they used a similar set of levers throughout the downturn:
     During the onset of the Great Recession, top performers cut costs aggressively and took a cleansheet approach to build organizations fit for the future. Some even increased variable expenses by renting rather than owning equipment and assets. Some also relied more on temporary workers. High performers achieved break-even points as low as 60 percent of revenues. They also aggressively managed sales, general, and administrative costs to keep them at relatively constant ratios.
     High performers were more likely than others to adjust inventories to reflect revenue drops and reduce relative capital-expenditure spend. They monitored and prioritized cash-releasing levers, such as working capital and accounts receivable and payable. Finally, high performers deployed cash with a new understanding of the opportunity costs, keeping dry powder available for strategic efforts.
    With diversified portfolios, many distributors can shift their focus to high-growth and high-profit customers. For example, building-material distributors with a relatively large presence in repair and remodeling saw more muted declines in revenue during the Great Recession. In the current downturn, distributors of safety gloves, masks, and cleaning chemicals have benefited by spikes in demand. These increases have balanced sharp declines in other manufacturing-heavy categories, such as fasteners and machinery.
    Years of research show . On average, companies that make frequent small-to-medium-size strategic acquisitions deliver more shareholder value than do competitors with “big bang” M&A strategies. That said, : savvy acquirers make it a pillar of scenario planning and overall strategy, and they deploy top talent full time to find targets, make deals, and manage integrations.
In short, high performers maintain cost discipline while building war chests to move quickly toward profitable growth as opportunities emerge. While the current downturn is unique, the same levers are nevertheless working for leading distributors. The shape of the recovery is still unknown and will likely vary across sectors, but, undoubtedly, companies that keep costs down, take a through-cycle view of capabilities by investing in talent and skills, and make bold, well-considered bets to ride the recovery wave will be among those that emerge strongest. Some will come out on top.
		
	
How to succeed in the next normalMost executive teams have found ways to deal with the ebb and flow of the pandemic, such as by setting clear guidelines to protect the safety of employees, cutting expenses, and closing and reopening offices. Many, however, have yet to focus on what lies ahead. Only a few distributors are now making strategic moves and convening teams to cut through the uncertainty and plan for the recovery.We believe distributors should consider the following five priorities to succeed in the next normal:
    
    
    
    
    
This is a singular moment. Across industries, the COVID-19 crisis is transforming executives’ understanding of their organizational capabilities. Whether it’s in areas of productivity or the speed of digital transformations, distributors are getting a better idea of where they stand in market share, valuation, and, most important, ability to compete. Some distributors will use this knowledge to transform themselves and emerge from the downturn fit to compete at the highest levels through the next technological revolution. Those that do not will be left behind.