
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    DCMS International Tech Hub Network
  

  
  
  
      
  The International Tech Hub Network (ITHN) works to forge innovation partnerships between the UK and international tech sectors, stimulate local digital economies, and build high-end digital skills to drive sustainable jobs and growth.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      17 December 2019
      Last updated
      
        18 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          The UK for tech collaboration

        
        
          Partner countries

        
        
          Case studies

        
        
          Latest news

        
        
          Network programmes

        
        
          Press releases

        
        
          Stay up-to-date

        
        
          Supportive partners

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Read our latest news.


The Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport’s International Tech Hub Network (ITHN) works to forge innovation partnerships between the UK and international tech sectors, stimulate local digital economies, and build high-end digital skills to drive sustainable jobs and growth.

The UK government is committed to supporting the UK tech sector to succeed in overseas markets, and to working with partner countries to build thriving digital ecosystems that drive growth and development. The Hubs support the growth of digital inclusion, creating local skilled jobs and generating opportunities for business partnerships.

The UK for tech collaboration

The UK generates more billion-dollar tech businesses and has higher levels of investment than any other European country. Our tech startup and scaleup ecosystem is valued at $585bn - 120% more than in 2017, and more than double the next most valuable ecosystem in Europe - Germany - at $291bn.

In the face of a challenging 2020, UK tech VC investment hit a record high of $15bn (ranking third in the world) with the majority coming from overseas, and deep tech investment experiencing the highest rate of growth globally. The UK is third in the world for investment into impact tech, which has increased 160% since 2018 while in the US it rose by 15% over the same period (TechNation).

Partner countries



UK-Israel Tech Hub: info@ukisraelhub.com

UK-Kenya Tech Hub: UKKenya.TechHub@fco.gov.uk

UK-Nigeria Tech Hub: UKNigeria.techhub@fco.gov.uk

UK-South Africa Tech Hub: uksatechhub@fco.gov.uk

For other Hubs contact: international-tech-hub-network@dcms.gov.uk

Case studies

Brazil

UK-Brazil Tech Hub partners with Future Females Business School

Indonesia

HERfuture

Kenya

UK-Kenya Tech Hub partners with Whitebox Entrepreneurs

UK-Kenya Tech Hub’s Digital Apprenticeship Programme

Nigeria

UK-Nigeria Tech Hub Innovative Teachers Fellowship

UK-Nigeria Tech Hub Developer Placement Programme

South Africa

UK-South Africa Tech Hub’s Digital Enablement Programme

UK-South Africa Tech Hub’s Launch League

Future Females Business School - South Africa

Latest news

26 May 2021

Celebrating two years of the International Tech Hub Network

9 July 2020

Reflections from Week One of the Tech Hubs Go Global virtual programme

2 July 2020

Meet the bright UK-South Africa Tech Hub alumni who have taken the first steps to expanding into the UK market

More news

Network programmes

International Tech Hubs support entrepreneurs to acquire the skills, resources and connections needed to accelerate their startup journey through a year-round calendar of activities and events.

In addition, the network delivers annual programmes which bring together tech innovators from across the world to share innovation, facilitating global partnerships. This includes Go Global, TeXchange and Female Tech Founders.

Go Global

Go Global supports startups to improve their business skills and capability, build links with the UK’s thriving tech sector, and work with UK expertise to grow their business. Following the programme, participants become Go Global Champions joining a network of global alumni, cascading new ideas to their local ecosystem.

Originally a UK-Israel Tech Hub programme, Go Global has expanded to new regions, reaching tech innovators around the world.


Africa

Go Global Africa

Go Global Africa took place across March and April 2019, supporting 18 startup founders from across the Hubs in Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa.



India

Go Global India 2019

Following the success of the Africa edition, Go Global India took place in October - December 2019, supporting 18 tech for good startup founders.

The UK-India Tech Hub was created as a pilot during 2019, delivering one of its own major programmes and contributing to others in the wider Network. The India Hub pilot concluded in April 2021.



Network wide

As a result of COVID19, the most recent edition of Go Global was delivered virtually across June and July 2020, and therefore was able to support 65 startups from across the entire Network. The programme offered a deep dive into challenges being faced, explored the best practice emerging to take them on and created a playbook of tools, tips and insights for startups to not only survive but build toward thriving in the future.


Female Tech Founders

Female Tech Founders 2020

Funmi Adewara - Female Tech Founders

In January 2020, we welcomed 15 of Africa’s most ambitious development-focused women entrepreneurs to London to participate in a three day tailored training programme. Africa-UK: Female Tech Founders was designed to empower women with the skills and connections to overcome the existing digital gender gap.

TeXchange

TeXchange 2020: Healthcare Innovation

In February 2020, the ITHN partnered with the UK-Israel Tech Hub on their flagship programme, which supports scale-up technology ventures from across the network to expand into the UK market by exposing British businesses to the world’s brightest innovation.

Press releases

UK supports Brazilian females to grow their tech-based businesses 1 February 2021

Stay up-to-date

Read about what the network has been up to on our blog.

Follow DCMS social media and using the #DCMSTechHubs hashtag.

Contact us at international-tech-hub-network@culture.gov.uk.

Supportive partners

Enterprise Academy, Seedcamp, Tech Nation, True and North, Tech Connect, Curvestone, CEW Communications, Public, Bethnal Green Ventures, Emma Zangs, PwC, Bird & Bird, INDUSLAW, Uncapped, Notion Capital, Google for Startups UK, Wefarm, Alma Angels, SeedTribe, Rainmaker Solutions, Protection Group International, Pontaq, CAST, Natwest Fintech Accelerator, At One Ventures.





      
        
    Published 17 December 2019
    Last updated 18 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              18 June 2021
              Added 8 new case studies.
            
            
              2 June 2021
              Updated news section.
            
            
              19 May 2021
              Updated with news and additional content.
            
            
              3 June 2020
              Latest News update
            
            
              3 February 2020
              Updated news, press releases and network programmes.
            
            
              17 December 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        UK-South Africa Tech Hub's Launch League
        UK-South Africa Tech Hub partners with Future Females Business School
        UK-South Africa Tech Hub's Digital Enablement Programme
        UK-Indonesia Tech Hub's HERfuture
        UK-Kenya Tech Hub's Digital Apprenticeship Programme

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Trade and investment

  


  

  


    
  


    