“Climate change is an unprecedented security threat,” Special Presidential Envoy on Climate  said in his keynote address at the Belfer Center’s conference to mark Earth Day. Iceland’s Minister of Foreign Affairs shared a similar warningduring a Belfer Center-Wilson Center : rapid climate change is increasing conflicts in the Arctic. His concern is underscored by a student Arctic data study, , on increasing international tensions around a small Norwegian archipelago. Dear Friends and Colleagues,At the Belfer Center, we don’t content ourselves with merely admiring problems. We work to tackle them. A generation ago, that meant securing loose nuclear weapons as the Soviet Union fell. Today, it means confronting another existential issue: climate change.As you’ll see in this newsletter, our scholars, staff, and students are addressing the environmental and global security threats of climate change. They’re working to rebalance energy use, safeguard our oceans, and protect vulnerable populations—all while developing the next generation of scientists, technologists, and policymakers to build a sustainable future.Belfer Center Senior Fellows , , , and took part in a panel moderated by Center Co-Director on After a year in which so many lost so much, the Belfer Center’s Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) Project recognized purpose-minded technologists who innovated in the face of crisis. These pioneers, chosen from hundreds of submissions across 14 countries, mobilized, organized, and charted a path forward to tackle fundamental problems spanning the medical field, structural racism, and privacy concerns in our online world.
 The inaugural class of TAPP Fellows were charged with conducting in-depth research that bends the arc of technological progress toward the public good. During a Showcase event in April, they presented work on topics including surveillance and data privacy,  trustworthy health data systems, and the science/technology expertise gap in government.
 Decisions to fund and support various types of technology impact everyone in society. Investors who take credit for innovation should also take responsibility for potential risks. TAPP researchers created a software tool and an accompanying playbook to help venture capitalists and startups better align their work with the public good.Former Secretary of State , Goldman Sachs’ , and Assistant Director for Space Policy spoke about their refugee/immigrant experiences in a Future of Diplomacy Project event. They were featured in Pres. George W. Bush’s book a collection of 43 portraits highlighting how America has been strengthened by those who have come here in search of a better life.In an inaugural event honoring the late Ambassador , President  spoke with the Future of Diplomacy Project’s  about foreign policy challenges when he was president and his perspective on key diplomatic issues today.  With China, Clinton said, “we have to work for the best and prepare for the worst.”A Future of Diplomacy Project seminar series this spring featured discussions on cultural diplomacy. In a recent event,  spoke with  about how she employed cultural diplomacy while serving as Ambassador to Japan.During a time of public upheaval, both civil and violent, ’s new book, , explains civil resistance and how it works, why it sometimes fails, how violence and repression affect it, and its long-term impacts. Chenoweth is the Frank Stanton Professor of the First Amendment at Harvard Kennedy School and the Susan S. and Kenneth L. Wallach Professor at Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study. In honor of Black History Month, Belfer Center Co-Director welcomed Seattle Seahawks’ , along with other notable guests, for a discussion focused on the importance of telling Black stories. Metcalf, who dedicated the month to sharing the story of Emmett Till, was joined by Till’s cousin, Reverend ., Harvard Kennedy School (HKS) Prof. , and ESPN’s . The event was moderated by HKS student .Cyber Project Executive Director  and , a Cyber Fellow and cybersecurity expert at Google, have been named  and also for their  in March to provide prominent social media platforms and amplify Black female voices and achievements. is a nationally recognized epidemiologist in public health and special pathogens preparedness and response. A Belfer Center Fellow, she directs the Special Pathogens Program at New York City Health + Hospitals. During the pandemic, her work has included providing extensive education on staying safe. We asked Syra how she maintains her energy and optimism. is Executive Assistant to , the Douglas Dillon Professor of Government at Harvard Kennedy School and former Director of the Belfer Center. For 15 years, she has managed to keep one of Harvard’s most active administrators and professors on schedule and organized. We asked her to share thoughts on her important work at the Center.As part of a Center-wide effort to continually strengthen the community’s diversity, directors organized a special International Council event for women in leadership positions to discuss “The U.S.-China Rivalry in Five Dimensions.”For the Spring 2021 issue of the journal , we highlight several articles including “Illusions of Autonomy: Why Europe Cannot Provide for Its Security If the United States Pulls Back” by and to“Water and Warfare: The Evolution and Operation of the Water Taboo” by , , and  are recognized for impact imagines a world of AI hackers asks  in an essay contest, and applies history to today  investigates climate media coverage and adaptive climate leadership, and explores the future of hydrogen joins with  in an essay contest for young women looks at impacts of COVID-19 on religion, and at the role of social media in nonviolent protests79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, Director, Co-Director
 Editor: , Associate Director of Communications
Designer: ,Publishing Manager
Multimedia: , Multimedia Producer
Digital Outreach: , Digital Communications Coordinator, Director of Global Communications & StrategyThe Communications Office would like to thank the following staff members for their assistance in producing this newsletter: , , , , , , and    