
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    WEEE: evidence and national protocols guidance
  

  
  

  
    
  How to issue evidence, meet and report on recovery and recycling targets and apply protocols on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Environment Agency

      
      Published
      6 May 2014
      Last updated
      
        22 May 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE): evidence and national protocols guidance
    
        
          Ref: LIT 7612
        
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    WEEE: recovery and recycling targets flow chart
    
        PDF, 5.93KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Template for AATF reporting recycling: recovery rates
    
        
          Ref: LIT 10353
        
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 10.9KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance for WEEE producer compliance schemes, approved authorised treatment facilities and approved exporters includes the:


  evidence and national protocols guidance
  WEEE recovery and recycling targets flow chart
  actual recovery and recycling rate template




        
      

      
    Published 6 May 2014
    Last updated 22 May 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 May 2020
              We have added information to clarify when an AATF and AE can issue evidence and the WEEE they can issue it on. We have updated the SMW and LDA protocols with the 2020 percentages. We have corrected the Northern Ireland contact details.
            
            
              25 January 2016
              Included guidance on how to complete the recovery and recycling rate template within the WEEE evidence and national protocols html document.
            
            
              29 December 2015
              A new template and guidance on how to complete it for AATFs to report on the actual annual WEEE recycling and recovery rates.
            
            
              18 March 2015
              Updated to include a link to guidance on how to correctly identify business to consumer (B2C) and business to business (B2B) EEE and WEEE.
            
            
              6 May 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        WMP5: Application form - approved authorised treatment facility (AATF)
        Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) collection: code of practice
        WEEE: collecting used and waste electrical and electronic equipment
        Waste batteries: treat, recycle and export
        Broadly equivalent standards for packaging and equivalent standards for WEEE and batteries

  




      

    Collection

  


        Producer responsibility regulations

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Waste

  


  

  


    
  


    