
    
    

        
        
        
    the United States set a target to create a “carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035”—an important element in the country’s goal of reducing emissions 50 to 52 percent by 2030 and achieving net-zero emissions by 2050.



        


    
     has found that significant and early decarbonization of the power sector is a critical factor across many of the pathways to a decarbonized economy. Renewable technologies such as solar and wind are already cost competitive with coal and gas across most US markets, and decarbonizing electricity is essential to enabling decarbonization in other sectors, such as transportation (electric vehicles) and buildings (electric heating).
	
This article presents a potential “zero-by-35” decarbonization scenario in which each regional power market would reach net-zero greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions by 2035 without offsets from other sectors. This model also accounts for increased electricity demand from transportation, building-heat electrification, and the industrial sectors that could put the economy on course for a 50 to 52 percent emissions reduction by 2030 and net-zero emissions by 2050. Essentially, this scenario represents a least-cost pathway to decarbonize the power sector while maintaining reliable and resilient electric-grid performance.


The key concepts and strategies to decarbonize the US power sector featured in this article highlight one potential pathway based on a certain set of inputs. Other viable pathways exist, and new pathways will likely emerge for both the power sector and the broader economy over the next decade and beyond as we learn more and as technology continues to develop. In contrast, a “status quo scenario” illustrates that without new federal emissions-reduction efforts, continual improvements in technology and existing state-level commitments may result in slower and less extensive decarbonization. We estimate that these policies would reduce nationwide power-sector emissions by 59 percent by 2040, relative to 2005 levels.The power sector’s pivotal role in decarbonizationA key lever for achieving the decarbonization ambitions of the United States is to transition from burning fossil fuels for transportation and heating to using “clean” electricity generated by renewables. To enable this transition, the electric-power sector may need to simultaneously decarbonize while meeting an approximately 40 percent increase in electrical load by 2035 (Exhibit 1). That translates to load growth of 2.0 percent per annum over the next decade, compared with a mere 0.5 percent in the status quo scenario (both stand in contrast to virtually zero load growth over the past 15 years).
    
The shape of this load will likely shift significantly, with greater movement toward winter-peaking systems, given the accelerated adoption of electric space and water heating. Some local grids in colder climates such as New England have already shifted to winter peaks, and our analysis shows that nearly all markets will likely shift by 2035 as use of heat pumps grows. In the meantime, large markets in warmer climates such as California and Texas will maintain summer peaking but will still see significantly higher winter demand due to increased heating.The zero-by-2035 scenario anticipates federal emissions-reduction programs that rapidly outpace state-level targets. Given the power sector’s critical role in helping realize these programs, customers, advocates, and regulators are accelerating their expectations for both the speed of decarbonization and end-state targets. Five years ago, few utilities had made commitments to fully decarbonize. Today, 23 states have plans to decarbonize either their power sectors or their entire economies by at least 80 percent by 2050, and many utilities are also establishing goals that are more ambitious than their respective state-level targets.Building out the required new sources of power generation, the transmission infrastructure to interconnect that generation, and grid-sited flexibility resources to balance intermittency could require up to $2.5 trillion by 2035. The additional cost to upgrade distribution grids, expand and reinforce transmission networks, and invest in downstream applications would increase costs even further. These costs may ultimately be borne by end customers and taxpayers, though the allocations of cost have yet to be determined and require further study.Ten big moves to help reach net-zero emissions by 2035
        


    
    Leaders in the electric-power and natural-gas sectors can make strategic decisions today despite uncertainties around state- and federal-level decarbonization pathways. As previously stated, there are multiple viable pathways for reaching net-zero GHG emissions by 2035 (see sidebar “An alternative to 100 percent power decarbonization”). The following list aims to provide project developers and operators, utilities, technology companies, governments, and others with a layer of specificity that may be missing from the current conversation around power-sector decarbonization. This additional specificity could help stakeholders further close the gap on uncertainties around deploying capital, scaling technologies, and mitigating risk.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    

    

    
These points illustrate what it might take for the United States to achieve a carbon pollution–free power sector by 2035. The scale of capital deployment, system transformation, and policy evolution is large. We hope that this article will spur discussion among market participants on what this level of decarbonization may require and on the business opportunities it presents.