
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: International Space Pitch Day
  

  
  

  
    
  Dstl and DASA are piloting a new approach to accelerate the development of commercial space technology, to rapidly provide solutions to defence problems

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, and Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      22 July 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition document: International Space Pitch Day
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: International Space Pitch Day
    
        PDF, 448KB, 9 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: International Space Pitch Day
    
        PDF, 336KB, 10 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) is piloting a new approach to accelerate the development of commercial space technology, to rapidly provide solutions to identified defence problems. To do so, the Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) is seeking proposals that meet a selection of US Department of Defense (DOD) and UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) space capability challenges.

Those who are successful during the submission stage will be invited to present their ideas at an International Space Pitch Day in November 2020. This exciting event will offer innovators in space capability a unique opportunity to pitch to senior military decision-makers.

It is important that any potential defence solutions are able to keep pace with the rapid technological change seen in the commercial sector. This competition is therefore mainly focused on technologies that have proven commercial value, which can then be applied to military space capability problems.

£800k (approximately $1M) is available to fund up to 15 proposals, with a maximum value of £53k (approximately $67k) each. This competition closes for submissions on Wednesday 2 September 2020 at midday BST.

To be eligible to submit a proposal, suppliers must first complete a registration questionnaire. The deadline for this is Wednesday 19 August 2020 at midday BST.



        
      

      
    Published 22 July 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Centre for Defence Enterprise marketplace: securing our future through innovation
        Behavioural Analytics Competition Scoping Workshop
        Competition: Map the Gap: autonomous gap crossing survey
        CDE themed competition: affordable space-based capability
        Rapid sanitising technology improves ambulance cleaning times and standards

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Armed forces
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    