
					

	

		
Navigate this Section

		

			





			

				
Select

									

						President Joe Biden					

									

						Vice President Kamala Harris					

									

						First Lady Dr. Jill Biden					

									

						Second Gentleman Douglas Emhoff					

									

						The Cabinet					

									

						Executive Office of the President					

							

		

	


	

		

			

									
The Biden-Harris Administration

				
				

											

														

								President Joe Biden							

													

											

														

								Vice President Kamala Harris							

													

											

														

								First Lady Dr. Jill Biden							

													

											

														

								Second Gentleman Douglas Emhoff							

													

											

														
The Cabinet

													

											

														

								Executive Office of the President							

													

									

			

		

	



					



The Cabinet’s role is to advise the President on any subject he or she may require relating to the duties of each member’s respective office.
President Joe Biden’s Cabinet includes Vice President Kamala Harris and the heads of the 15 executive departments — the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Education, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, Housing and Urban Development, Interior, Labor, State, Transportation, Treasury, and Veterans Affairs, and the Attorney General. Additionally, the Cabinet includes the White House Chief of Staff, the US Ambassador to the United Nations, the Director of National Intelligence, and the US Trade Representative, as well as the heads of the Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Management and Budget, Council of Economic Advisers, Office of Science and Technology Policy, and Small Business Administration.





President Biden’s Cabinet reflects his pledge to appoint leaders of government agencies that reflect the country they aim to serve.





In order of succession to the Presidency:








		

		


		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Kamala Harris		


					

				Vice President			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Antony Blinken		


					

				Secretary of State			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Dr. Janet Yellen		


					

				Secretary of the Treasury			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Lloyd Austin		


					

				Secretary of Defense			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Merrick Garland		


					

				Attorney General			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Deb Haaland		


					

				Secretary of the Interior			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Tom Vilsack		


					

				Secretary of Agriculture			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Gina Raimondo		


					

				Secretary of Commerce			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Marty Walsh		


					

				Secretary of Labor			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Xavier Becerra		


					

				Secretary of Health and Human Services			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Marcia Fudge		


					

				Secretary of Housing and Urban Development			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Pete Buttigieg		


					

				Secretary of Transportation			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Jennifer Granholm		


					

				Secretary of Energy			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Dr. Miguel Cardona		


					

				Secretary of Education			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Denis McDonough		


					

				Secretary of Veterans Affairs			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Alejandro Mayorkas		


					

				Secretary of Homeland Security			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Michael Regan		


					

				ADMINISTRATOR OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Avril Haines		


					

				Director of National Intelligence			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Katherine Tai		


					

				United States Trade Representative			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Linda Thomas-Greenfield		


					

				United States Ambassador to the United Nations			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Dr. Cecilia Rouse		


					

				Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Isabel Guzman		


					

				Administrator of the Small Business Administration			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Dr. Eric Lander		


					

				Presidential Science Advisor and Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy			

				
		

	







		


			

									

						
					

							


	


		

			Ron Klain		


					

				Chief of Staff			

				
		

	




		









				