
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Moving prohibited plants, plant pests, pathogens and soil
  

  
  
  
      
  How to apply for a scientific licence to import, move or keep material that's usually prohibited, fees you must pay and how to move it.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Animal and Plant Health Agency and Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      29 July 2015
      Last updated
      
        30 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who can get a licence

        
        
          Licences for invertebrate plant pests and plant pathogens

        
        
          Licences for prohibited plants, parts of plants and seeds

        
        
          Licences for prohibited soil and other organic material

        
        
          Apply for a licence

        
        
          What to include in your application

        
        
          What to include in your standard operating procedure (SOP)

        
        
          Moving consignments within England and Wales

        
        
          Bringing material in from other countries

        
        
          How to pack materials

        
        
          Transport, handling and storage

        
        
          Inspections

        
        
          Change an existing licence

        
        
          Destroying plants, parts of plants and seeds

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
You must get a licence from the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) to import, move or keep prohibited:


  plants, including parts of plants and seeds
  invertebrate plant pests (arthropods, molluscs and nematodes)
  plant pathogens (fungi, bacteria, viruses, virus-like agents and phytoplasmas)
  soil and other organic material
  potatoes


Your licence will include the specific conditions under which you must import, move or keep the material.

You must follow these along with the conditions set out in this guidance.

If you’re in Scotland, contact Science and Advice for Scottish Agriculture.

If you’re in Northern Ireland, contact the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development.

Who can get a licence

You can only get a licence if you’re using the prohibited items for:


  official testing
  scientific research
  educational purposes
  trials
  testing new varieties of plants (varietal selection)
  breeding


Licences for invertebrate plant pests and plant pathogens

You must have a licence to import, move or keep invertebrate plant pests or plant pathogens which meet any one of the following conditions:


  they’re Great Britain quarantine pests listed in Schedule 1 of the Plant Health (EU Exit) Regulations 2020

  they’re Great Britain provisional quarantine pests (PQPs) listed in Schedule 2 of the Plant Health (EU Exit) Regulations 2020
  they’re Pest Free Area quarantine pests for Great Britain listed in Schedule 4 of the Plant Health (EU Exit) Regulations 2020
  they’re assessed to be a Great Britain potential quarantine pest by Defra  - contact APHA to check if the pest or pathogen you wish to work with meets the potential quarantine pest criteria


You do not need a licence to import, move or keep invertebrate plant pests or plant pathogens which meet any one of the following conditions:


  they’re a Regulated Non-Quarantine Pest (RNQP) listed in Schedule 4 of the Plant Health (EU Exit) Regulations 2020
  they’re assessed not to be a Great Britain potential quarantine pest by Defra - contact APHA to check if the invertebrate or pathogen you wish to work with meets the potential quarantine pest criteria.


Contact APHA to check if an invertebrate plant pest or pathogen is prohibited.

Licences for prohibited plants, parts of plants and seeds

You must have a licence to import, move or keep any plants, parts of plants or seeds listed in Schedule 6 of the Plant Health (EU Exit) Regulations 2020.

Using a licence instead of a phytosanitary certificate

You may be able to use a licence to bring in plants, parts of plants and seeds which would normally need a phytosanitary certificate.

You can only do this if you can’t get the phytosanitary certificate for scientifically justified reasons contact APHA if you want to do this.

Licences for prohibited soil and other organic material

You must have a licence to import, move, or keep soil from all third countries excluding EU member states, Liechtenstein and Switzerland. 
This also applies to any organic material which is capable of sustaining plant life and which contains solid organic matter, for example humus, peat other than pure and unused peat, moss, bark and artificial growing media which contains organic matter.

You don’t need a licence for:


  marine sediments
  pure and unused peat
  pure and unused fibre of Cocos nucifera L.
  pure sand, clay, talc, rocks, volcanic pumice and chalk
  water that isn’t contaminated by soil or organic matter


Apply for a licence
You should apply for a licence at least two months before you need it, using Defra’s eDomero online application system.

If you haven’t used eDomero before, you need to register as a new user

Application fees

New licences for prohibited plants, plant pests and pathogens cost £995.36. This fee covers a licence for 5 types of material - you must pay a further £52.45 for each extra type of material.

New licences for prohibited soil or other organic material cost £745.41 if requested for chemical or physical analysis, and cost £995.36 if required for other purposes.

APHA will send you an invoice after you apply for a licence using the eDomero system.

What to include in your application

Your application must include the following details:


  place of origin of the material
  quantity of the material
  number of consignments of the material and quantity per consignment
  duration of the work on the specified material
  summary of the nature and objectives of the work
  packaging conditions under which the material will be moved or imported
  final use of the specified material on completion of the work, for example, destruction, collection, storage or * release (release is only applicable to plants)
  method of destruction or treatment of the material on completion of the work
  standard operating procedure (SOP) including contact details for your consignor (supplier).
  List of personnel who will be working with the licensed material


What to include in your standard operating procedure (SOP)
You should upload your SOP as an attached file to your application on eDomero. Within your SOP you should provide details of your:


  site security
  record-keeping and labelling
  the layout of your facilities
  the procedures you’ll follow during experiments


Site security

You must confirm:


  all areas containing quarantine material are kept locked
  the names of anyone who has access to quarantine areas or a set of keys
  how you label quarantine areas
  that all authorised personnel will read and sign a standard operating procedure before starting work with licensed material


Record-keeping and labelling

You must describe how you’ll:


  keep dated records when new material arrives and how you’ll move or dispose of existing licensed material
  label or distinguish licensed material at all stages of your experiments
  move or dispose of existing specified material


Your facilities

You must:


  describe the type of containment facility you’ll use, for example glasshouses, polytunnels, laboratories
  describe the location of containment facilities on your premises - give room numbers or a geographic location relative to a named or numbered area and make a plan of your facility if possible
  give details of how often authorised staff enter the containment facilities
  describe how much material you’ll keep in containment facilities at a given time
  describe how you’ll keep licensed material within 3 layers of secure containment to stop plant pests escaping
  state the other material that will arrive with the licensed material (for example soil) and how you’ll handle it or dispose of it
  state whether you’ll keep licensed and non-licensed material in the same containment facilities
  describe the type of work you’ll carry out in each area of your site
  describe the containers you’ll grow plants in, if the licensed material includes plants for planting
  describe the traps you’ll use to detect the escape of licensed organisms
  provide a detailed contingency plan you’ll use if organisms escape or if you suspect they’ve escaped


Your experimental procedures

You must also state:


  how you’ll carry out your experiments - give a step by step description of every experiment you intend to do
  whether workers will wear dedicated protective clothing that’s only used when working on licensed material and how you’ll clean it after use
  the precautions you’ll take when transporting material between containment facilities during experiments
  the disinfectants you’ll use to clean containment facilities, their concentration and how you’ll use them
  how you’ll destroy the licensed material after you’ve finished working with it, and before you dispose of it
  a list of the scientific and technical qualifications of all personnel who’ll do work under the licence you’re applying for


Moving consignments within England and Wales

You must follow certain rules to send and receive material from other sites within England and Wales.

Sending material to other sites

You can send licensed prohibited material to other people or organisations in England and Wales, provided the destination site or person has a licence to receive them.

Complete the PHI 10 form and send it to APHA - if they approve your plan, they’ll send you a written agreement.

This written agreement is valid for 12 months, provided the recipient’s licence isn’t amended or cancelled in this time.

If the recipient changes the terms of their licence you’ll have to contact APHA for a new approval.

Receiving material from other sites

You must have a licence to receive prohibited material from other people or organisations in England and Wales.

You must also make sure your supplier has a licence and a written agreement from APHA.

Receiving material from outbreak sites

You can only receive material from an outbreak site that’s under an APHA notice if the notice allows this.

Contact APHA if you’re unsure which are under notice.

You must have a licence to hold and work with any material you receive.

Bringing material in from other countries

If you get a licence to bring prohibited material in from overseas, it will have a ‘letter of authority’ attached - you must keep this letter

Letters of authority are valid for 1 calendar year (1 January to 31 December). APHA issue a new letter of authority each year and charge you £42.50.

Importing prohibited material

Follow these steps to import prohibited material into England and Wales under a licence:


  Send a copy of your letter of authority to the supplier.
  Ask your supplier to get your letter of authority endorsed by the National Plant Protection Organisation (NPPO) in their country.
  Ask your supplier to attach the letter to the outside of the package and include a copy inside each package.


If you’re importing material in luggage, you must present it at the red customs channel, along with the appropriate letter of authority, when you arrive in England or Wales.

Exporting material to other countries
There are different rules you must follow to export material to countries in the EU and to other non-EU third countries.

Exporting material to EU countries

Follow these steps to send prohibited material to EU countries:


  Ask the recipient for a copy of their letter of authority.
  Send the letter of authority to APHA to be endorsed.
  Attach your endorsed letter of authority to the outside of all packages before you export them. You should also include a copy inside the packaging.


If the recipient tells you that you don’t need a letter of authority, ask them to show you official confirmation of this from their NPPO or SASA for Scotland and DAERA for Northern Ireland.

You shouldn’t send your material until you’ve got this confirmation.

Exporting material to non-EU third countries

To export material to non-EU third countries, you must comply with the import regulations in the destination country.

APHA may be able to give you advice about import regulations in the destination country.

How to pack materials

You must make sure any prohibited material you’re moving under a licence is stored in 3 layers of packaging.

At least 1 of the layers must be escape and shatter-proof.

Transport, handling and storage

You must make sure you have licensed material transported to your authorised containment facility directly from the place of landing or the licensed establishment in England and Wales.

You must only open, handle and keep licensed material in the approved quarantine containment facility listed on your licence.

Inspections

You must make all licensed material available for inspection by your local APHA inspector.

You must allow the inspector to check how you’re keeping the material - they may take samples of material or any associated organisms, for example invertebrates.

You must contact APHA on the first working day after a consignment of plants arrives to inform them of any plants you’ve received under licence.

Keep the plants in isolation until APHA has inspected them.

Inspection fees

Your application fee covers the cost of your first inspection.

Some licences must then be inspected every year, especially new licences. In other cases inspectors will reinspect every 2 or 3 years.

The first inspector who visits your site will tell you how often you need to be reinspected.

If you fail an inspection you must pay for any further inspections, at a cost of £370.68 an hour, with a minimum of £185.34.

Change an existing licence

You can apply to change your licence using eDomero - for example to add new facilities or material.

APHA may re-inspect your facilities as part of this application process.

Licence amendment fees

Licence amendments that require a Defra scientific or technical assessment cost £380.25.

Amendments that don’t need an assessment cost £42.50.

APHA will send you an invoice after you apply to change a licence through the eDomero system.

Destroying plants, parts of plants and seeds

You must usually destroy plant material after you’ve completed the research your facility was licensed to do.

In some circumstances, you may be allowed to test the plant material and get it released from the terms of its licence.

Contact APHA if you want to get plant material released from its licence instead of destroying it.

You’ll have to get the plant material tested and pay any costs associated with this.





      
        
    Published 29 July 2015
    Last updated 30 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 June 2021
              Updated the link to the PHI 10 form. It is under the section 'Moving consignments within England and Wales'.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              Update to fees associated with licensing 
Change to the invertebrates and pathogens that require a licence
Change to plant passports and phytosanitary certificates (PCs)
            
            
              5 May 2020
              Clarified the application fees because there are two types of soil licence which have different costs. A soil licence for work other than chemical and physical analysis is £995.36. Soil for chemical and physical analysis  is £745.41.
            
            
              1 May 2020
              New information about letters of authority - they last for one calendar year and cost £42.50 each year.
            
            
              21 April 2020
              Updated fees information, changed 'licence' to 'authorisation', brought guidance into line with new SRSF regulations.
            
            
              5 August 2019
              Increase in fee's - content updated.
            
            
              23 April 2019
              Application fees updated
            
            
              28 June 2018
              Updated licence application fees
            
            
              26 January 2016
              Amendments to section on renewing and amending existing licences, and licence amendment fees. There is no longer a requirement to renew scientific licences.
            
            
              29 July 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  

      
    
      Part of
          
            Get UK customs clearance when importing goods into the UK: step by step
          
        
  


      
    
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 1:
                  
                
              

              
                Check if you need to follow this process
              
          

          
              Follow these steps to get your goods for import through UK customs if you’re managing the process yourself.

              Getting customs clearance is complicated. You can hire a transporter or customs agent to make the import declaration and get your goods through UK customs.

              Hire someone to deal with customs for you 

              Your business must be ready to import the goods before you can get customs clearance.

              Find out about importing goods from the UK 

              Check if you need to make an import declaration 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 2:
                  
                
              

              
                Set up your business for making import declarations
              
          

          
              You need an EORI number that starts with GB to import goods into England, Wales or Scotland. You'll need a new one if you have an EORI that does not start with GB.

              If you move goods to or from Northern Ireland you may need one that starts with XI.

              Get an EORI number 

              Depending on where you're moving goods, you need to be registered on the right systems and have compatible software to make declarations.

              Check what systems and software you need to make declarations 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 3:
                  
                
              

              
                Check if you can make the customs process quicker
              
          

          
              There are processes that can make clearing customs quicker and easier to manage if you have to make import declarations regularly.

              
Find out about using simplified declaration procedures 
Check if Authorised Economic Operator status is right for you 


              If you're importing goods from the EU to England, Scotland or Wales (Great Britain) you might be able to delay making a declaration for up to 6 months.

              Check if you can declare your goods later if you're importing goods from the EU 

              If you regularly import goods using Common Transit, you can apply to start movements of goods at your own premises.

              Check if consignee status is right for your business 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 4:
                  
                
              

              
                Register to import goods with restrictions
              
          

          
              You need to register as an importer if you import things like plant or animal products, high-risk food or feed, medicines, textiles, chemicals or firearms. 

              Register to import:

              
fresh produce, plants or plant products  
You are currently viewing: ‘prohibited’ plants or plant products 
live fish or shellfish 
wood or wood products 
human medicines 
veterinary medicines 
chemicals 
controlled goods 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 5:
                  
                
              

              
                Check if you need a licence or certificate for your goods
              
          

          
              There are special rules and you may need to get licences or certificates if you are importing any of the following:

              
animals and animal products 
plants and plant products 
high risk food 
veterinary medicines 
human medicine 
controlled drugs 
tissues and cells for human application 
waste 
products containing F gas 
precursor chemicals 
hazardous chemicals 
nuclear material 
guns, knives, swords and other weapons 
weapons and goods that could be used for torture or capital punishment 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      and
                  
                
              

              
                Check the labelling, marking and marketing rules
              
          

          
              Check the marking, labelling and marketing standards for food, plant seeds and manufactured goods 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 6:
                  
                
              

              
                Arrange for the goods to be inspected
              
          

          
              If you import things like plant or animal products, you need to choose a place where the goods can be inspected. This needs to happen before they’re allowed through the UK border.

              
Find an inspection point for animals and animal products 
Find an inspection point for plants, plant products, seeds and wood 
Find an inspection point for high risk food and feed that is not of animal origin 
Find an inspection point for endangered species, or products made from endangered plants or animals 


              You need to let the inspection point know when the goods are arriving. You might have to pay a fee for the inspection.

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 7:
                  
                
              

              
                Submit the import declaration
              
          

          
              Find out how to submit import declarations 

              If you're importing goods from the EU to England, Scotland or Wales (Great Britain) you might be able to delay making a declaration for up to 6 months.

              Check if you can declare your goods later to make the importing process quicker 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 8:
                  
                
              

              
                Pay VAT and duty
              
          

          
              HMRC will tell you how much to pay after you submit the declaration. 

              Find out how and when to pay VAT and duty 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 9:
                  
                
              

              
                Get the goods released if they're held up at the border
              
          

          
              The goods may be held at the border if, for example:

              
you have not paid the right amount of duty or VAT
you do not have the right import licences for the goods or business
they did not pass inspection
they've been combined with a shipment that has been held up


              If this happens you will be told why.

              Contact the National Clearance Hub to get help 

          

        
    
  











    