The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), in partnership with the  (CESMII), announced selections for four new Smart Manufacturing Innovation Centers (SMICs) bringing the total to eight SMICs. Through specialized training and direct industry engagement, the centers will help U.S. manufacturers implement smart manufacturing technologies to optimize their use of energy and materials. .DOE  $127 million to support 110 continuing research and development projects in the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program. This investment includes more than $12 million funded by the Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO) for technology innovations that improve energy efficiency, material productivity, and competitiveness for U.S. manufacturers. .DOE recently announced a request for information (RFI) to inform the creation of a new Clean Energy Manufacturing Institute. This RFI is specifically focused on aspects of industrial decarbonization associated with electrification and/or metals manufacturing. .Four DOE offices, including AMO, are offering free, tailored technical assistance to industrial, commercial, and federal sites as they implement business practices based on the global gold standard for energy management: International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 50001. .AMO recently announced the Association of Energy Engineers (AEE) as a new provider of professional credentialing services in support of DOE’s energy management programs. DOE's Superior Energy Performance 50001™ (™) program and  programs provide guidance, tools, protocols, and recognition to help facilities implement energy management systems and attain deeper, more sustained savings from ISO 50001-compliant energy management systems. .From July 26-30, AMO hosted Future of Manufacturing Week. This weeklong campaign highlighted the DOE’s recent investments in the development and deployment of clean-energy technologies needed to ensure a resilient manufacturing sector and decarbonize energy-intensive industries throughout the economy. .AMO will host a workshop exploring the future of manufacturing on September 8 – 10. The workshop will cover the significant changes the U.S. manufacturing sector is undergoing and inform the direction of AMO’s Transformative, Resilient, Adaptive, Nimble, Sustainable, Smart, Flexible, Optimal, Robust, and Model-based (TRANSSFORM) initiative. This initiative will empower the U.S manufacturing industry of the future to strengthen its domestic supply chain, increase innovation, and enhance its global competitiveness. .Applications open this fall for DOE’s Lab Embedded Entrepreneurship Program 2022 cohorts. These cohorts will join an extensive network of mentors and experts at U.S. national laboratories to develop the next-generation technologies that will help pave the way to a clean-energy future. Learn more about the DOE programs accepting applications and register to attend the following informational webinars:Hosted by DOE’s  (HPC4EI) initiative, this virtual event will include a plenary session in which DOE will discuss advances in world-class Exascale computers and in emerging Artificial Intelligence capabilities. The event will also highlight how this program develops next-generation computational scientists as we work with industry to meet their technical and business objectives while saving energy for the nation. .