
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Open general export licence (exports in support of joint strike fighter: F-35 Lightning II)
  

  
  

  
    
  Licence allowing the export or transfer of goods, software or technology for the Joint Strike Fighter (F-35 Lightning II) (JSF) programme.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      6 January 2014
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence: exports in support of Joint Strike Fighter (F-35 Lightning II)
    
        PDF, 332KB, 14 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Revoked open general export licence: exports in support of Joint Strike Fighter (F-35 Lightning II)
    
        PDF, 859KB, 14 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This open general export licence (OGEL) allows the export or transfer of goods, software or technology for the Joint Strike Fighter (F-35 Lightning II) (JSF) Programme from the UK to any of the destinations or countries listed in this licence. This includes re-exporting goods, software or technology to and from permitted destinations, even if they have been incorporated into other products.

Reporting requirements

This OGEL is subject to reporting requirements under the open licence returns transparency initiative.

Revoked licences

The most recent revoked licence is available in the documents section.

You can find older revoked versions of the OGEL (exports in support of joint strike fighter: F-35 Lightning II) on the National Archives website.




        
      

      
    Published 6 January 2014
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              This Open General Export Licence has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              17 December 2020
              This OGEL has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              18 February 2020
              The ability to register for this licence has been reinstated.
            
            
              6 April 2018
              Licence updated and amended to reflect new contact details for the Export Control Joint Unit.
            
            
              6 October 2015
              South Korea added to countries listed under Section 3.2 (permitted destinations).
            
            
              13 June 2014
              Licence amended to reflect the new Government Security Classification System.
            
            
              6 January 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Open general export licences for military goods: collaborative project typhoon
        Open general licence (Iraq)
        Open general export licences for military goods: A400M collaborative programme
        Open general export licence (export after exhibition: dual-use items)
        General export authorisation: trade in torture goods

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    