
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19): Student sponsors
  

  
  
  
      
  This is advice for UK sponsors whose students are affected by coronavirus (COVID-19).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      3 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        30 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Student absence

        
        
          Distance learning

        
        
          Students who have not yet applied for a visa

        
        
          Students waiting for visa decisions

        
        
          If you need more information about the measures in place for students and their sponsors

        
        
          Contact UK Visas and Immigration for help

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Student absence

We will not take enforcement action against sponsors who continue to sponsor students despite absences due to coronavirus.

You do not need to report student absences related to coronavirus.

This can include absences due to illness, their need to isolate or inability to travel due to travel restrictions.

You do not need to withdraw sponsorship if students are studying remotely because of coronavirus, as they are considered to be attending.

We will keep this under review.

Distance learning

You can continue to sponsor existing students (including Tier 4) who are continuing their studies through distance learning, or starting a new course, whether they’re in the UK or another country.

You can also start sponsoring new students who will start studying through distance or blended learning in the 2020-2021 academic year, provided you intend to transition to face-to-face learning as soon as it is possible to do so.

If a student has permanently withdrawn from their studies or deferred their studies for a period exceeding 60 days, you must report this as usual.

You do not need to withdraw sponsorship for new students who have been issued a Student visa but are distance learning because they have been unable to travel to the UK.

If a student stops engaging with their distance learning for more than 30 days, whether overseas or in the UK, you must withdraw sponsorship.

New international students who have not yet applied for a visa but want to start a course which will wholly be studied overseas by distance learning do not require sponsorship under the Student or Child Student routes. This is because they do not need to travel to the UK.

For students planning to travel to the UK to start a course by distance learning, they must have a CAS and a Student or Child Student visa before they travel.

You do not need to tell the Home Office when students have moved to distance learning.
This distance learning concession will be in place for the duration of the 2020-21 academic year. The concession will be subject to regular monitoring to ensure it is working as intended, and we will review it at the end of the 2020-21 academic year.

Students who have not yet applied for a visa

If you have issued a confirmation of acceptance for studies (CAS), the student can still apply for a visa.

The start date for the course stated on the CAS may have changed. We will not automatically refuse such cases.

For example, we may accept a CAS if it has become invalid because the student was unable to travel as a result of coronavirus. We will consider this on a case-by-case basis.

Students waiting for visa decisions

You may allow students to start their studies before their visa application has been decided if:


  you are a Student sponsor
  you have assigned the student a CAS
  the student submitted their application before their current visa expired and has shown you evidence of this
  the course they start is the same as the one listed on their CAS
  the student has a valid Academic Technology Approval Scheme (ATAS) certificate if required


Your reporting responsibilities start from the date that you issue the CAS, not from the date that their application is granted.

If the student’s application is eventually rejected as invalid or refused you must terminate the student’s studies.

If you need more information about the measures in place for students and their sponsors

You can read detailed guidance on the temporary measures in place for Student sponsors, their students and short-term students in response to the COVID-19 outbreak.

Contact UK Visas and Immigration for help

If you have other immigration queries, please contact the general immigration helpline.




      
        
    Published 3 March 2021
    Last updated 30 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 March 2021
              Updated information on contacting the general immigration helpline.
            
            
              3 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Short-term students caseworker guidance
        Interviewing process for Tier 4 student visa applicants
        Studying (Immigration staff guidance)
        Fee changes for Tier 4 visas, Tier 1 post study visa: impact assessment
        Academic Technology Approval Scheme (ATAS): occupation codes

  




      

    Collection

  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): immigration and borders

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Student visas

  


  

  


    
  


    