
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Zero rate of VAT for electronic publications
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out about the zero rate of VAT for certain electronic publications.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      30 April 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          What supplied electronically means

        
        
          Items that are not entitled to the VAT zero rate

        
        
          Items that are entitled to the VAT zero rate

        
        
          Lending of electronic publications

        
        
          Zero rated e-publication supplied together with another supply

        
        
          Publications for completing

        
        
          E-book readers and software

        
        
          More information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guidance gives you information about zero rate supplies of certain electronic publications (e-publications). The changes were originally intended to take effect from 1 December 2020. However, following the outbreak of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic the date has been brought forward to 1 May 2020.

What supplied electronically means

The term ‘supplied electronically’ is not defined in legislation. It falls to be interpreted in accordance with its generally accepted meaning and includes supplies made over the internet and by e-mail.

Items that are not entitled to the VAT zero rate

There are some items that are not included in the publications eligible for the zero rate of VAT.

Advertising

If more than half of an e-publication is devoted to advertising, audio or video content, its supply will be standard rated for VAT purposes.

Example

An auction house sells e-brochures containing information about lots in a forthcoming auction. Since the e-brochure is predominantly advertising, its sale is standard rated.

Audiobooks

The extension only applies to the supply of electronic versions of books already zero rated in UK law. As such, zero-rating is limited to electronic versions of books that can be read or looked at. Supplies of audiobooks remain taxable at the standard rate whether supplied in a physical or digital format.

Example

A business supplies an e-audiobook that is narrated by a well-known actor. It is designed only to be listened to. Since this e-audiobook is wholly devoted to audio content, its supply will be standard rated for VAT purposes.

Intellectual property

Supplies of intellectual property, even if they are supplied electronically, are not supplies of e-publications and are always standard rated. Further, electronically supplied plans or drawings for industrial, architectural, engineering, commercial or similar purposes are specifically excluded in the legislation.

Items that are entitled to the VAT zero rate

The following electronically supplied products are now eligible for the zero rate of VAT:


  books
  booklets
  brochures
  pamphlets
  leaflets
  newspapers
  journals and periodicals - including magazines
  children’s picture and painting books


Lending of electronic publications

The lending of any of the zero rated e-publications for a charge (for example, by a library) is zero rated.

Zero rated e-publication supplied together with another supply

Where a transaction consists of more than one element, for example where a zero rated e-publication is supplied together with something else, it is necessary to determine whether the supplier is making a single supply or multiple supplies.

The suppler makes a single supply where one element of the supply is the principal element to which all other elements are ancillary.

The supplier makes multiple supplies where the various elements of the supply are distinct and independent.

Indicators of a single supply include:


  a single price
  the supply is advertised as a package
  the components are not available separately
  the components are supplied at the same time
  the customers perceive that what they are getting is a single supply


There are multiple supplies where two or more element is distinct and independent. Indicators of more than one supply taking place include:


  separate pricing or invoicing
  the items are available separately
  there is a time differential between parts of the supply
  elements of the supply are not inter-dependent or connected


You can find out more information about this in VATSC11100.

Example 1

A business offers its customers access, by subscription, to an e-newspaper and a printed newspaper. Since the e-newspaper and printed newspaper are both zero rated, the subscription will be zero rated for VAT purposes.

Example 2

A business offers to sell an e-audio book and a printed book at a discounted price. Since both products are available to be purchased separately and the elements of the supplies are not inter-dependent, there are two separate supplies: one of a standard rated audio book and the other of a zero rated book.

Publications for completing

The supply of an e-publication that is predominantly for completing, unless it is an electronic version of a printed book whose supply is already included within the zero rate or an electronically supplied children’s picture or painting book which is now specifically zero rated by UK legislation, is standard rated.

E-book readers and software

E-book readers

E-book readers are one form of hardware to which e-books can be downloaded before being read but are not in themselves e-books. Therefore, supplies of e-book readers are standard rated (unless they meet certain conditions and are sold as part of an assistive technology system – see VAT Notice 701/7 for further information).

Software

Software (for example an ‘app’) is used to access e-publications but is not in itself an e-publication. Therefore, supplies of such software are standard rated.

More information

You can find out more information about zero rating books and printed matter in VAT Notice 701/10.




      
        
    Published 30 April 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Health institutions supplies (VAT Notice 701/31)
        Ships, trains, aircraft and associated services (VAT Notice 744C)
        VAT Refund Scheme for charities (VAT Notice 1001)
        VAT Transport
        The VAT treatment of passenger transport (VAT Notice 744A)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        VAT

  


  

  


    
  


    