
  
    
      Multi-functional devices (MFD) and printing

    

      
        
  Find the right way to buy multi-functional devices (MFD) and printing services for your school.

      
        
          

    

See if you can buy through a DfE-approved multi-functional devices (MFDs) framework.


See where to get help with buying for schools if you need it.






















































































            

      
        
          
            Before you start
          
        
        

    Planning and scope
You’ll need to know:

  
    what your strategic objectives are, for example, reducing spend, productivity improvements, or meeting learning or sustainability targets
  
  
    your school’s existing organisational structure, including the number of buildings and locations you have
  
  
    your school’s likely future organisational structure so you can plan what you need for the longer term
  
  
    what printing assets are in your project scope (like MFDs, desktop printers, faxes, scanners), including an audit of:

    
      
        the number of assets you have
      
      
        the type, model or make of your assets
      
      
        the current cost and location of your assets
      
      
        what existing lease agreements, including expiry dates, break-fix contacts, desktop services you already have
      
      
        your annual print volumes
      
      
        your current spend across all printing services
      
    
  

Having this information is useful because changing your printing services can take longer than you think and will help you to:

  buy the right printing services for your school’s needs
  make dealing with suppliers easier
  get better deals from suppliers
  meet your school’s learning and financial objectives
  anticipate long term changes

Specifications
You’ll need to tell suppliers what software, hardware and network infrastructure you have so suppliers can advise you properly and give you accurate costings and timescales.
You’ll also need to think about any planned changes to your school or trust’s organisational structure which may affect future needs as well as the implementation period.
See the section on writing your specification for more information.
People
If you’re making big changes, you’ll need to involve the right teaching, buying and technical teams.
For example, procurement and ICT will need to be involved in the planning and implementation phases and teaching staff will need training on how to use any new equipment.
You should consider getting a high-level sponsor if you need to make changes across your organisational structure.
For bigger projects, it may be easier to have a dedicated person who can act as project manager so you can coordinate work, budgets and costs.



      
        
          
            Features and services
          
        
        

    Think about whether you need your MFDs to:

  
    be standalone or connected to a network
  
  
    print large volumes of paper or at speed to avoid large print queues
  
  
    print in colour
  
  
    fax, scan and email
  
  
    collate, hole-punch and staple paper
  
  
    have advanced features such as printing double-sided or on different sizes and types of paper
  
  
    have password protection and monitor use
  


Example

Buying several lower specification MFDs in some cases might be cheaper than one advanced model. You won’t pay for features you don’t need and you’ll still have access to printing services if there’s a fault with one machine.

Running and maintenance costs
Check:

  
    how much you’ll be charged for black and white copies and colour copies (some suppliers offer better rates if you print mostly in black and white or colour)
  
  
    the standing charge or minimum monthly page use is realistic
  
  
    what your maintenance fee is and whether it’s fixed or variable
  
  
    what level of maintenance support you’ll get, including fault reporting, turnaround times and who’s responsible for fixing faults
  




      
        
          
            Buying or leasing
          
        
        

    Planning what you need to buy might help you decide whether to buy or lease.
Whether you choose to buy or lease, you can only enter into an operating lease. Financial leases are borrowing and unlawful, and are often poor value so make sure you always follow your school’s procurement rules.
Using a DfE-approved multi-functional devices (MFDs) framework can help you find the best deals.
Buying outright might:

  
    be cheaper in the long run, avoiding ongoing leasing costs
  
  
    simpler, avoiding the leasing application process and financial checks
  
  
    give you more control over devices, how you use them and what maintenance you’re required to do
  
  
    mean you can sell if you no longer use it and upgrade
  

Leasing might allow you to:

  
    lower your upfront costs (leasing rarely involves big initial payments)
  
  
    upgrade to the latest technology more easily without the financial commitment of buying
  
  
    budget more easily as you know what you’ll be paying each month and not losing money through depreciation
  

If you do lease MFDs, check the cancellation policy as you may need to give more than 30 days’ notice in order to cancel.



      
        
          
            Writing your specification
          
        
        

    Whichever procurement method you choose, you’ll need to write down your requirements in a specification. Your specification will describe what you need so that suppliers can choose whether to bid for the contract.
It should include:

  school objectives or goals that relate to MFDs and printing
  any environmental sustainability policies that a supplier will need to adhere to
  what services you need, including any additional features, functions or software compatibility requirements
  how many devices and copies you’ll need
  how you expect the contract to be managed
  where the devices will be located


Use our tool to create a specification for buying MFDs.

More information about writing a specification is available.



      
        
          
            Find the right way to buy
          
        
        

    Buying from a framework is usually quicker and easier than getting bids or quotes because the agreements:

  
    have already been through a full competitive tender process
  
  
    have been quality checked
  
  
    are checked to make sure they comply with the law
  


See if you can buy through a DfE-approved multi-functional devices (MFDs) framework.





        
  
