
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Make things accessible and inclusive
  

  
  
  
      
  Make sure your technology, infrastructure and systems are accessible and inclusive for all users.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      6 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How making things accessible and inclusive will help your programme

        
        
          How to build accessible technology

        
        
          How to buy accessible technology

        
        
          How to supply accessible technology

        
        
          Related guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet point 2 of the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) your plans must show how you’re making technology inclusive.

If you’re going through the spend control process you must explain how you’re meeting point 2.

The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.

How making things accessible and inclusive will help your programme

Your technology project or programme will benefit from:


  making your technology work for as many users as possible
  all staff members having easy access to the information and infrastructure they need to do their work, for example, your organisation’s network, authoring tools, project management software and HR suites
  assurance that there is no barrier to employing people with specific access needs
  avoiding potential legal challenges


Legally, public sector websites and apps must meet accessibility standards. And all suppliers to government have a legal duty to make their technology and services accessible to all, especially people with disabilities.

How to build accessible technology

When building IT infrastructure and systems make sure you consider accessibility from the start of your project or programme. Do research with users who have a range of abilities and decide on your accessibility requirements. Doing this means you can make sure that:


  government workers are not restricted
  it is easier to build accessible services for citizens


For example, you should consider:


  the accessible space in your office environment or server rooms
  which hardware you choose, how compatible it is with assistive technologies and what accessible functionality comes as standard
  which software you choose, such as the authoring tools and software that operates as a user interface or as assistive technology


If you’re also building or buying technology to provide a service over the web:


  consider using the GOV.UK Design System to build your service
  read the guidance on making your service accessible



How to buy accessible technology

When you’re buying a technology product you buy something that’s as accessible as possible.

You can:


  use the guidelines on procuring an accessible website or app

  use the open standard - EN 301 549 for accessibility requirements
  search for accessible technology using the Digital Marketplace and the G-cloud buyers guide



If you have questions, you can get help from the government digital buying community.

How to supply accessible technology

If you’re supplying a technology product to the public sector, you might need to make a statement about how that product meets accessibility standards.

EN 301 549 is a standard that covers procurement of web technologies and other types of technology, including hardware and non-web software.

Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 2.1) is a standard that covers websites and digital services. You meet WCAG 2.1 AA standard as a minimum.

If your technology is a website or digital service which meets the WCAG 2.1 AA standard, you can assume it also meets the requirements of EN 301 549.

Using the EN 301 549 standard in procurement frameworks

Find out what sort of conformity assessment or attestation potential buyers are likely to want from you.

For example, if you want to apply to be a supplier on the G-Cloud framework you’ll need to:


  answer the question about accessibility in the supplier declaration so it’s easy for potential buyers to tell whether your product meets their accessibility requirements
  provide some more detail on how your product meets the relevant standard in the service definition document


When you’re providing more details the service definition document consider:


  what evidence you have that your product meets the relevant standard
  whether your product was tested with assistive technologies - and if so, which ones
  how you’ll make sure that future updates to the product won’t have a negative impact on accessibility


You must be accurate about how far your product meets accessibility standards. The buyer may ask for confirmation as part of the call off contract, either from you directly, or through a third party certification.

Meeting the WCAG 2.1 standard for websites and digital services

Read the guidance on the WCAG 2.1 AA standard.

You might want to consider:


  using GOV.UK Frontend to help your service meet WCAG 2.1
  paying to get your product audited against WCAG 2.1 by an accessibility expert



Next: Technology Code of Practice point 3 - Be open and use open source


Related guides


  Government technology standards and guidance
  Understanding accessibility requirements for public sector bodies
  Equality Act 2010





      
        
    Published 6 November 2017
    Last updated 31 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 March 2021
              Addition of a temporary research survey to get user feedback on the Technology Code of Practice.
            
            
              28 March 2019
              Added more information about the listed accessibility standards and restructured the layout.
            
            
              6 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Government technology standards and guidance
        Define user needs
        Be open and use open source
        The technology code of practice
        How Hackney Council built an API Platform

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    