
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    The ARTES (Advanced Research in Telecommunications Systems) Programme
  

  
  

  
    
  ARTES is the European Space Agency (ESA) research and development programme for commercial telecommunications products and services.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      6 July 2021
      Last updated
      
        8 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    ARTES Programme: Advanced Technology Proposal form
    
        ODT, 55.9 KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ARTES Programme: Advanced Technology Proposal form guidance
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ARTES Programme: Expression of Interest form
    
        ODT, 32.6 KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ARTES Programme: Expression of Interest guidance
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            


The UK has subscribed over £250 million into the ARTES programme to 2022 to support UK industry develop the next generation of telecommunications products, services and applications. This guidance refers to the technology development elements of the programme and not Business Applications.

Information on how to apply for Business Applications.

Programme news


  
    World’s first fully flexible satellite lifts-off
  
  
    British-built satellites will help fight climate change and save wildlife
  
  
    UK companies join forces to build revolutionary beam-hopping satellite
  
  
    New government funding helps UK companies lead the way for future Moon missions
  
  
    Government-backed 5G facility to be built in Oxfordshire
  


Funding Opportunities

ARTES has two main funding programmes:

1 . Advanced Technology: This is an ESA-initiated programme offering 100% funding for developing early technologies and innovations. Invitations to tender are listed on the ESA website here.

As part of the application process, companies will need to apply to the UK Space Agency for approval before they submit their application. This is a three-stage application, in which:


  applicants should complete an Expression of Interest form in the first instance
  successful applicants will be asked to complete the Advanced Technology application form
  successful applicants can apply to ESA.
Application forms for Expressions of Interest and Advanced Technology are available above.


2 . Competitiveness and Growth: This is an industry-led programme offering matched funding for developing commercial satellite communications technology solutions and innovations.

As part of the application process, companies will need to apply to the UK Space Agency for approval before they submit their application to ESA.

Further details on the ESA application process are available on the ESA website.

New Applications

The UK Space Agency (UKSA) is inviting applications for UK support to the ARTES Competitiveness and Growth programme from UK companies looking to develop technologies, products and services in telecommunications. 
This first general call, with up to €20,000,000 of funding being made available, is for all satellite telecommunications activities.

No upper or lower limit has been set for individual projects. All projects must include an element of matched funding to be eligible under the programme. Further details on matched funding and other eligibility requirements are contained in the guidance document above.

Please read the guidance on how to apply for UK support and note the requirement to submit an Expression of Interest, prior to the submission of your proposal.

The call opens on Friday 19 November 2021 and will close at midday on 31 January 2022. The UK Space Agency aims to notify all bidders of the results of their bid during February 2022.

Schedule for UK support

(Note: This does not include the ESA application process. Please see UK Space Agency guidance for further details on this.)


Call for applications: UK National Delegate support for the ESA ARTES Programme.



  Funding call opens: 19 November 2021.
  Deadline for submission of Expressions of Interest: 7 January 2022 at midday GMT.
  Deadline for submission of proposals: 31 January 2022 at midday GMT.
  Notification of UK outcomes: 28 February 2022.


Any questions about this funding opportunity should be submitted to artes@ukspaceagency.gov.uk. Questions submitted to any other UK Space Agency email address may not be considered.

Webinars

We have developed a series of webinars to guide you through the new application process for requesting UK National Delegate Support under the ARTES Telecoms Programme. If you are interested in joining one of these sessions, please follow the links below to book your place:


  ESA ARTES Programme: Applying to the UK for National Delegate Support Wednesday 15th December 2021

  ESA ARTES Programme: Applying to the UK for National Delegate Support Tuesday 11th January 2022



Complaints

If you are unhappy with either the outcome of your application or how the process was managed, or for any other reason, you can make a complaint by contacting the team at artes@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.

Please set out the nature of your complaint in detail. The team will try to resolve a complaint in the first instance but, if resolution is not possible, we will refer it to the UK Space Agency central complaints process, where it will be independently assessed.

Further information

If you would like any further information, or have any questions or feedback about this guidance, please contact the team at artes@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.



        
      

      
    Published 6 July 2021
    Last updated 8 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 December 2021
              Updated with new webinar dates for 'Applying to the UK for National Delegate Support'
            
            
              19 November 2021
              Included the new Call for applications: UK National Delegate support for the ESA ARTES Programme
            
            
              19 November 2021
              Updated November 2021
            
            
              11 November 2021
              Updated applications call details and complaints procedure.
            
            
              6 July 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Call for applications: UK National Delegate support for the ESA ARTES Programme
        Multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) annual report 2013-14
        HM Prison and Probation Service staff equalities report: 2017 to 2018
        Race and the criminal justice system 2016
        HM Prison and Probation Service staff equalities report: 2018 to 2019

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Communications and telecomms
        Space

  


  

  


    
  


    