
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    MOD Science and Technology Strategy 2020
  

  
  

  
    
  This document outlines the MOD’s vision to secure future advantage through science and technology.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      19 October 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    MOD Science and Technology Strategy 2020
    
        PDF, 3.99MB, 40 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
We are living in a time of unprecedented technological change. New adversaries have emerged, alongside traditional threats, who actively undermine our democracy and society, supported by substantial and rapidly modernising militaries. Terrorist groups and non-state actors can access technologies and weapons far more sophisticated than before.

Science and technology (S&T) has itself become a theatre of strategic competition. New areas of study are emerging at the intersection of established scientific domains; new technologies and applications of technology are developing and being adopted faster than ever before; our adversaries have become adept at shaping and exploiting these developments for military and political advantage. Our response needs to reflect this new state of affairs, and also help us shape the future context more actively.

This means setting our sights on the long term, building towards the future capabilities we need, taking risks, nurturing scientific and technological literacy, collaborating more effectively, and extracting every drop of value from our data.

The MOD S&T strategy sets out the aim to prioritise higher-risk, high reward research that will support the generation-after-next of military capabilities while continuing to maintain the range of critical S&T capabilities that supports our national security.




        
      

      
    Published 19 October 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        AI, Data Science and Machine Learning: a Dstl biscuit book
        Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
        Building Blocks for AI and Autonomy: a Dstl biscuit book
        Assurance of AI and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
        Dstl biscuit books

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    