"...a brisk, authoritative, and candid biography, and a wonderfully compelling history of America’s heady and troubled mid-century rise."By Penguin Random House, September 2020This volume explores the first thirty-nine years of JFK's life—from birth through his decision to run for president— to reveal his early relationships, his formative experiences during World War II, his ideas, writings, and political aspirations. Logevall’s writing illustrates a more serious, independently minded Kennedy than we've previously known, whose international sensibility would prepare him to enter national politics at a critical moment in modern U.S. history.  "...an important contribution to our understanding of extralegal violence, marshaling novel cross-national data on lynchings... "By Danielle F. Jung and Elements in Political Economy Series, Cambridge University Press, September 2020What are the social and political consequences of poor state governance and low state legitimacy? Under what conditions does lynching — lethal, extralegal group violence to punish offenses to the community — become an acceptable practice? The authors argue lynching emerges when neither the state nor its challengers have a monopoly over legitimate authority. When authority is contested or ambiguous, mass punishment for transgressions can emerge that is public, brutal, and requires broad participation.   "...this book offers thoughtful analyses about the current state of homeland security as well as recommendations for its future."Edited by Chappell Lawson, Belfer Center Studies in International Security, MIT Press, August 2020The contributors discuss counterterrorism, cybersecurity, and critical infrastructure protection; border security and immigration; transportation security; emergency management; combating transnational crime; protecting privacy in a world of increasingly intrusive government scrutiny; and managing the sprawling homeland security bureaucracy. They offer crucial strategic lessons and detailed recommendations on how to improve the U.S. homeland security enterprise.  "...a highly accessible and engaging history of U.S. diplomacy written by one of the country's smartest and most capable foreign policy practitioners."By Twelve: Hachette Book Group, 2020.Both a sweeping work of history and an insightful guide to U.S. diplomacy past and present,  serves as an informative companion and practical adviser to readers seeking to understand the strategic and immediate challenges of U.S. foreign policy during an era of transformation.  "...an original archival history of government secrecy, public relations and the debate surrounding nuclear weapons in Britain from 1970 to 1983."By Daniel Salisbury, Associate, Project on Managing the AtomRoutledge, 2020The book contrasts the secrecy and near-silence of the Heath, Wilson, and Callaghan governments on nuclear issues in the 1970s with the increasingly vocal case made for the possession of nuclear weapons by the first Thatcher government following a shift in approach in 1980.