

This report explores areas of innovation in citizen science including in relation to new applications, methods used, approaches to recruiting participants and building capacity for citizen science. It also considers emerging themes and topical issues and their implications, including in relation to using personal health data, artificial intelligence, the diversity of participants, policymaking, governance and data security issues.




Read Online

Emerging developments in citizen science
Reflecting on areas of innovation
by Brandi Leach, Sarah Parkinson, Catherine A. Lichten, Sonja Marjanovic
Related Topics: Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, Biomedical Research, Capacity Building, Citizen Science, Data Privacy, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.7 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

What are key areas of innovation in citizen science and crowdsourcing?What methodological innovations are happening in citizen science and crowdsourcing projects?What types of innovative approaches are being used to support the recruitment, retention and engagement of participants in citizen science and crowdsourcing projects?What new research areas and policy areas are citizen science and crowdsourcing approaches being applied to?What are important current debates shaping the future direction of citizen science?



Citizen science — an approach whereby citizens actively contribute to the generation of knowledge about important research questions — is gaining increased attention in research and policy communities. Recent years have seen an expansion in the scale of citizen science activity globally, as well as an increase in the diversity of ways in which citizens can contribute to research endeavours. This report, informed by a literature review and interviews with selected experts, explores key areas of innovation and emerging and topical issues in citizen science, with a particular but not exclusive interest in healthcare related applications. More specifically, the report explores innovation related to new areas of applications of citizen science; novel methods of data gathering and analysis; innovative approaches to recruiting, retaining and enabling participation in citizen science projects; and building capacity for citizen science. The report also considers emerging themes and topical issues within the field and their implications.
Key Findings

There is a growing interest in adopting citizen science in studies that involve personal health data and in epidemiological studies, and new technological platforms and models of governance are emerging to facilitate safe and data collection and use.

Citizen science is also receiving increased attention in policymaking and in evidence-based advocacy by local communities.

Citizen science can contribute to improving research quality, for example by complementing traditional research methods.

Advances in smartphone capabilities and sensor technologies, together with new opportunities for integrating diverse data sources, are enabling new methods of data collection in citizen science projects. Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning are also allowing for efficiency gains.

There are also increasingly innovative approaches to recruiting and retaining participants in citizen science projects, including raising awareness about opportunities via large media organisations; using gamification; smartphone apps that remove barriers to underrepresented groups contributing; and using virtual peers (i.e. 'bots') to influence the levels of engagement.

As the field of citizen science evolves, opportunities are arising to increase its scope, scale and impact. However, new challenges are also surfacing, especially in relation to effective governance and management.

Topical issues receiving attention in the field include: enabling diverse types of involvement across the research process; ensuring that citizen science research is of an appropriate quality; supporting diversity and the involvement of hard to reach populations; ensuring effective governance and ethical practice; and managing risks and mitigating unintended consequences.




 Related Products 








Project
Examining innovation in citizen science

Feb 17, 2020






Table of Contents

Chapter One
Research context and aims

Chapter Two
Methodology

Chapter Three
Innovation in citizen science and crowdsourcing for research

Chapter Four
Conclusion




Research conducted by

RAND Europe



This research was commissioned by The Healthcare Improvement Studies Institute (THIS Institute) and conducted by RAND Europe.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 45
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR4401
Document Number: RR-4401-THIS
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Artificial IntelligenceBig DataBiomedical ResearchCapacity BuildingCitizen ScienceData PrivacyScience, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Leach, Brandi, Sarah Parkinson, Catherine A. Lichten, and Sonja Marjanovic, Emerging developments in citizen science: Reflecting on areas of innovation. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4401.html.
Leach, Brandi, Sarah Parkinson, Catherine A. Lichten, and Sonja Marjanovic, Emerging developments in citizen science: Reflecting on areas of innovation, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4401-THIS, 2020. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4401.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



