 says Naomi Bagdonas, a lecturer at the Stanford Graduate School of Business. In the class she leads with co-lecturer Connor Diemand-Yauman, a member of McKinsey’s Consortium for Learning Innovation, the duo amuse and introduce students to the science and benefits of leading with laughter in business settings and a new world of remote interactions. Here’s a sample of their zany shtick. Roll the tape or read the transcript below.
    
    
        
Video transcript Hi, I’m Naomi. And I’m lonely. Oh, I know you’re lonely, but your name is Connor. And you’re not alone in feeling lonely. With the shift to remote work, many of us have never felt further apart from our colleagues, families, and gyms. OK, let’s try that again. Hi there. I’m Connor Diemand-Yauman. And I’m Naomi Bagdonas. And we’re lecturers at the Stanford Graduate School of Business with the inimitable Dr. Jennifer Aaker, where we teach about the intersection of humor, business, and leadership. We’ve also launched an online course called Remotely Humorous, which is focused on cultivating more productive, connected, and joyful cultures in remote teams. And we recently released a bestselling book on the topic called Humor, Seriously. We’re really into this stuff. Yeah, we’re kind of obsessed with this, actually. We do a lot of journaling on this topic. Yep. A lot of journaling. Connor does a lot of journaling. Yeah. Using notebook after notebook. Pages and pages. Sometimes I put some blood on the pages. There’s a lock of Naomi’s hair. For authenticity, he says, but it’s very weird.
	
 It’s part of my process. So, you get it, we’re kind of obsessed with this topic of humor and leadership. And we’re so excited to be here today. We’ve worked with executives and teams across sectors, helping them figure out how to bring more humor and levity to their organizations and teams, which has proven to be far more lucrative than our animal onesie ribbon-dancing business. Yeah, that’s true. It turns out that our specific form of interpretive dance requires a lot more interpretation from the audience. Yeah. I also thought this was too much. They [the audience] thought that was a lot. That move they thought was—they didn’t know how to interpret. So today, we’re going to talk about humor and why it is a superpower in business, now more than ever. Because we are living in a brave new world of work. The way we interact and collaborate with our fellow coworkers has changed dramatically. And in this context, it’s harder than ever to foster creativity, well-being, and connection in our teams, when we can’t even get together at cocktail parties and talk about that killer two by two we just made this week. Or where you used your Marriott points last month or looked for that awful non sequitur just so you can humble brag about your fancy airline status with that other bigwig executive you really want to impress. By the way, I’m Premier 1K, United. I don’t know if you knew that, Naomi. Yeah, I did, actually. And I’m Premier 1K also, on multiple airlines, if not all airlines. Oh, well, Premier 1K Platinum. So it’s actually like there’s this elite one that I didn’t tell you about. Yeah, it’s interesting, I think once you get to private jet status, they stop, like, counting it, because it’s like, wah-wah, we get it, you’re very important. Yeah. I own a private jet. Well, OK. In this new world of remote work, where we rarely see our colleagues in person—or from the waist down—research reveals that humor is one of the most powerful forces an organization has for building genuine connection, well-being, and intellectual safety among our colleagues. But don’t take our word for it. Take science’s word for it. Let’s dive into the neuroscience of laughter. And we’d love to share a short clip on this very topic. Naomi, were we able to book the two renowned speakers for this? We were. World experts. I mean, far more decorated and fabulous to listen to than us. Oh my gosh, I’m so glad. We had Oprah and Prince Harry as a backup. I cannot believe we booked these two. I can’t, either. Brace yourself. Let’s roll the clip. Roll the clip.The neuroscience of laughter Let’s talk cocktails. Brain cocktails, that is. When we laugh, our brains release a cocktail of hormones. These hormones make us feel happier, less stressed, slightly euphoric, and more trusting. If only I could give oxytocin to my cat. He won’t come near me. This means that when we laugh with colleagues, we’re not just having fun, we’re serving up a powerful hormone cocktail that can literally change their—and our—brain chemistry, on the spot. Research shows that laughing has unparalleled effects on our neurochemistry and behaviors. It changes the chemistry of your brain to make you more primed for connection, more creative and resourceful, and more resilient to stress. As one example, oxytocin prompts our brains to create emotional bonds, to trust each other more. This explains why oxytocin is also released when people have sex and when mothers give birth, both moments when, evolutionarily speaking, we benefit from feelings of closeness and trust with the person involved, even if the relationship is brand-new. Which reminds me of a riddle my mom used to tell me as a kid. Oh, yeah? What is it? What do the following three things have in common? OK. People having sex, people giving birth, and people laughing with their colleagues over Zoom. Your mom used to tell you this? Everyone’s building trust, and no one’s wearing pants. Humor also impacts our memories by flooding our reward centers with dopamine. Humor makes us more engaged in the moment and helps us remember more content after the fact. In one study, researchers found that people who watched a humorous film clip before taking a short-term memory test recalled more than twice as much information as those in a control group. Which means if you’re not saying something humorous, you better be saying it twice as many times. Ayo! Which means, if you’re not saying something humorous, you better be saying it twice as many times. Ayo! And no one wants that. These are just a few of humor’s many benefits, which can come in handy when giving instructions, keeping calm under a deadline, or confusing bullies long enough to escape. The important thing to remember is that we’re hardwired to respond to humor in ways that benefit us and our team cultures. And think about the impact of this neurochemical alchemy on virtual teams. Remotely, we share far fewer experiences and common points of reference, but when we laugh together, our brains are firing with the same hormones at the same time, cuing us to trust each other more and make those two-dimensional interactions more memorable. The power of experiencing the same burst of bonding, pleasurable hormones, even from hundreds or thousands of miles away, is impossible to overstate. And to think, these powerful experiences are all thanks to the brain cocktail that laughter serves up. And that’s a cocktail you can drink before noon. Oh, you kill me. Come on, stop it, come on. It’s too much. Come on, I could do more. I love teaching with you. I love teaching. I love teaching. It’s my favorite thing. Wow. They did it again. Incredible. They did it again. Riveting. They said it couldn’t be done. No. And they did it. And they did it. That is absolutely incredible. And these shifts in our brain that we just heard from those renowned experts change not just how we see ourselves and how we behave but also how other people see us, and how they behave. Leaders with a sense of humor are seen as 27 percent more motivating and admired. Their employees are 15 percent more engaged. Their teams are more than twice as likely to solve a creativity challenge. So, the point is—and this is why we work with so many executives on humor in leadership—is that humor isn’t just for fun, although it is a lot of fun. But it’s also a critical leadership skill, like communication, self-awareness, and hiding the fact that you’re multitasking while watching this video. Naomi? What? Well, that’s all the time that we have today. We’re so sorry to have to wrap this up. But as you return to the daily grind of this bizarre new normal that we’re swimming in right now, we hope you’ll keep in mind just these three things. First, it’s time to become remotely humorous. Laughter impacts our brains and our behaviors in profound ways, and it’s more valuable than ever in this new world of remote work. So start living your life on the precipice of a smile. Second, say yes. Notice your colleagues’ small offers of levity, and accept them. Build on them. And finally, actively cultivate your rituals and your stories. Create new rituals that help you stay connected and drive levity at your organization, even when you’re remote. And tell your companies’ stories far and wide. Thanks for watching. And until next time— Keep it real— —keep it light. —and keep finding your reason to smile. Bye. Bye. See ya. Bye bye now. See you soon. Thanks for coming. Call soon. Also call your mother. Call your mother. How long has it been? It’s been a while, hasn’t it? It’s been a while. And she’s called multiple times. You know how much she’s sacrificed for you, right? Oh, don’t get me started on your mother’s sacrifice. Do you know what your mother did for you? Is it off? Are they still here? I don’t know. How do you cut this thing? I don’t know. Cut it. Cut it now. Can the editors cut it? Editors, editors, help us! Help!