
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Project Gigabit: UK subsidy advice
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance covering plans to improve the UK's broadband network, with emphasis on making high-speed broadband available in rural areas.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      1 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        23 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Detailed overview of the Gigabit Infrastructure Subsidy scheme
    
        PDF, 1.27 MB, 46 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    OMR/PR - Subsidy Control Classification Guidance  
    
        PDF, 1.07 MB, 16 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Project Gigabit - Table of Ongoing BDUK Subsidy Procurements
    
        ODS, 160 KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Gigabit Infrastructure Subsidy guidance: transparency (monitoring and reporting)
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Commercial

Details of the contracts and procurement process are available at the eTendering System for Gigabit Infrastructure Subsidy Contracts.

Background

The Future Telecoms Infrastructure Review (FTIR) was published in July 2018 and laid out a vision for a full fibre and 5G future for the UK highlighting the considerable potential benefits to the UK.

The key findings of the FTIR were that, despite over 97% coverage of superfast broadband, largely based on copper user connections, the UK was in danger of falling behind on rolling out fibre and 5G connections. It proposed a more proactive approach than has been taken historically in the UK.

The FTIR proposed, as part of a wider range of measures under the Project Gigabit, an “outside in” procurement approach, named the Gigabit Infrastructure Subsidy . In essence this procurement approach seeks to minimise market distortion by relying on industry to build where it makes commercial sense to do so. Rather than wait for this process to run its course, FTIR recommends that we identify the non-commercial areas, expected to be at the outside of the networks, and to build to these premises in parallel to commercial build , seeking to provide gigabit-capable connectivity across all areas of the UK at the same time, ensuring no areas are systematically left behind.

Government subsidy rules

Under the United Kingdom/European Union Withdrawal Agreement of October 2019, all awards made prior to the end of the Transition Period (31 December 2020) continue to fall under the State Aid regime for a period of four years and need to be managed in accordance with the rules in that period.

This also applies for future procurements and awards made under the Superfast Broadband Programme. 
We are developing the UK Gigabit Programme within the UK Subsidy Control Regime and have published detailed guidance on the approach.



        
      

      
    Published 1 June 2021
    Last updated 23 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 November 2021
              Subsidy tracker update
            
            
              12 November 2021
              Added Transparency (Monitoring & Reporting) guidance
            
            
              19 October 2021
              Addition of Subsidy OMR/PR guidance
            
            
              1 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Building Digital UK
        UK Gigabit Programme: public reviews
        Resources for communications network providers
        Project Gigabit Delivery Plan - Summer Update
        GigaHubs: key information

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Broadband investment

  


  

  


    
  


    