
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Local Plan Pathfinders: expressions of interest
  

  
  

  
    
  MHCLG is seeking submissions of expressions of interest from local authorities for the Local Plans Pathfinders, which will be open from 23 March to 9 April.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government

      
      Published
      23 March 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Local Plan Pathfinders: expressions of interest 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Local Plan Pathfinder programme: application template (Word version)
    
        MS Word Document, 30.5KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@communities.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Local Plan Pathfinder programme: application template (Open document version)
    
        ODT, 17KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@communities.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Funded Pathfinder projects are intended to test digital and data aspects of planning reforms set out in the Planning White Paper. The projects will inform policy and demonstrate how the reforms can benefit the local government sector.

The pathfinder programme will bring together 10 local authorities to look at the digital transformation of local plans.  The transition to interactive map-based local plans underpinned by machine readable open data will help local people to engage with planning in their local area more easily, which will increase community involvement and help get homes built more quickly.




        
      

      
    Published 23 March 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Local Plans

  


  

  


    
  


    