
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Garth Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Garth is a men’s high security prison near Leyland, Lancashire.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      5 May 2020
      Last updated
      
        6 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Garth

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Garth

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Garth

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Garth

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.


Book and plan your visit to Garth


Garth prison is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 1 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


To visit someone in Garth you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit at least 2 days in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


Up to 2 adults and 2 children can visit at a time. At least one visitor must be 18 or older.

Contact Garth if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Garth
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits
Garth is running a limited visits schedule. Visits are also happening differently than normal, observing strict guidelines, which must be followed.

You can book your visit by telephone. You can also register to use the secure video calls service. There is no online booking service available.

Booking line: 01772 443 503
The booking line is open Monday to Thursday, 9am to 12pm, 2pm to 4pm
Find out about call charges

Visiting times:


  Monday to Thursday: 2pm to 4pm


You should arrive early to allow time to get through security.

How to book legal and professional visits

Legal visits booking line: 01772 443 503
The booking line is open Monday to Thursday, 9am to 12pm, 2pm to 4pm
Find out about call charges

Legal visiting times


  Tuesday to Thursday: 2pm to 4pm


Getting to Garth
Find Garth on a map

Garth is about 5 miles from Leyland station. Local buses run towards Croston Park but you will need to walk the last 2 miles to Garth. Alternatively, you can take a taxi from the station.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



If coming by car, use the postcode PR26 8LW for sat nav.

There is a visitors car park outside the prison, including space for Blue Badge holders.

Entering Garth
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors will pass through a metal detector and be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Garth has a family-friendly dress code policy which means visitors should dress appropriately. You may be turned away if you are wearing items like vests, low-cut tops, high-cut skirts or dresses, shorts, see-through or ripped clothing, flip-flops or headwear other than that worn for religious reasons. Additionally, you cannot wear anything with offensive patterns or slogans, football shirts, cargo or combat trousers, uniforms (except school uniforms), hi-visibility clothing, steel toe-capped footwear or football boots. You will need to remove hats, scarves, sunglasses, gloves, large belt buckles, metal hair clips and excessive jewellery before you go in.

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Garth. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker (you will need a £1 coin for this) in the visitors centre. This includes pushchairs and car seats.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There is a visitors centre run by Partners of Prisoners (POPS).

The centre is open on visiting days from 11:30am to 4:30pm.

Telephone: 01772 622 129
Find out about call charges

The visiting hall is on the ground floor and wheelchair accessible. There is a children’s play area with activities organised by a play worker. Parents and guardians remain responsible for their children at all times.

Family days
There are currently no family days being run.

Keep in touch with someone at Garth
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Garth.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Phone calls
Prisoners have phones in their rooms and are able to make calls every day between 6am and 10pm.

Phones do not accept incoming calls so they will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Email
You can send emails to someone in Garth using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies, depending on the rules at Garth.

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Garth.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts
You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
Prisoners can apply for permission to receive items from friends and family. The items can then be handed in at the visitors entrance before a visit between 1:05pm and 1:30pm.

There are limits to the number of parcels a prisoner can receive. Only specific items are allowed. Ask at the visitors centre for details.

Items are not normally accepted by post. However, a prisoner who is a foreign national or does not get visits can apply for permission for a family member or friend to send items in.

All parcels will be opened and checked by officers.

Friends and families of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.

For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Life at Garth
Garth is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men convicted of serious offences can make positive use of long sentences.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Garth has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

Garth works in partnership with relevant parties including the Lancashire Safeguarding Adults Board to manage and support prisoners.

Arrival and first night
When someone first arrives at Garth, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will be seen by a member of the nursing team to talk about immediate health needs, including medication.

They will also get to speak with a member of the First Night team to discuss any concerns and learn about Samaritans phone access, the prison Listeners scheme, use of the emergency cell bell and unit rules.

Induction
Each person who arrives at Garth gets an induction that lasts about a week. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


They will also meet the chaplaincy team and get a gym induction.

Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Around 800 men live at Garth. Most men get their own room.

Education and work
Prisoners have access to a broad programme of learning opportunities provided by Novus. These include literacy and numeracy, skills for life, personal and social development and distance learning. Garth is part of the Prisons ICT Academy (PICTA) which helps prepare prisoners for work in information and communications technology (ICT) roles.

Training is available in motor mechanics, light engineering, industrial cleaning and joinery.

Work is available throughout the prison, including the kitchens, PE department, farms and gardens and waste management. Prisoners are also employed by several industrial workshops, including:


  plastic injection moulding
  textiles
  DHL
  wheelchair and bike repair
  print shop
  light fittings and fire alarm assembly
  industrial cleaning
  braille book printing
  tool hire
  construction joinery manufacturing


Most roles include the opportunity to study for qualifications.

Garth runs a peer tutor scheme where prisoners support each other with employment opportunities.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Support at Garth
Partners of Prisoners (POPs) can provide information, guidance and support to families and friends of prisoners.

You can ask for more information in the visitors centre or contact them by email and telephone.

Email: garthvc@partnersofprisoners.co.uk
Telephone: 01772 622 129
Find out about call charges

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Garth.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Garth in response to independent inspections.

Contact Garth
Governor: Steve Pearson

Telephone: 01772 443 300
Fax: 01772 443 301
Find out about call charges

Follow Garth on Twitter

Address


HMP Garth
Ulnes Walton
Leyland
Preston
PR26 8NE



See map

Safer custody hotline
If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a man in Garth, call the safer custody hotline. Leave as much information as possible about the prisoner and your concerns, as well as your contact details. The answerphone is checked regularly.

Telephone: 01772 443 676
Find out about call charges

In an emergency, call the main telephone number.


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.






      
        
    Published 5 May 2020
    Last updated 6 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 August 2021
              Updated physical contact guidance
            
            
              18 June 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              16 June 2021
              Prison has resumed visits for family, friends and significant others. We will update this page with specific visiting information as soon as possible.
            
            
              19 May 2021
              Additional guidance about new COVID-19 variant in the Bolton and Blackburn areas.
            
            
              21 December 2020
              Updated visit info
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              19 October 2020
              Updated visiting restrictions
            
            
              15 September 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              12 August 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              22 July 2020
              Added confirmation of secure video calls being made available at this prison.
            
            
              5 May 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Grendon Prison
        Portland Prison and Young Offender Institution
        Moorland Prison
        Usk Prison
        Morton Hall Prison

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    