
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
  

  
  

  
    
  A short guide to understanding and valuing data, from defining the different types of data to dealing with bad data and bias.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence Science and Technology Laboratory

      
      Published
      6 October 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Crumbs! Understanding Data: a Dstl biscuit book
    
        PDF, 1MB, 40 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email centralenquiries@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Advances in digital technologies, artifical intelligence and data science techniques require good quality, accessible data. Data is critical to Dstl and to the nation as a whole, so we need to treat it as a valuable asset.

In this non-technical guide, data science experts from Dstl help you understand data and why it’s so important, as well as exploring troubles with data, data-wrangling, documentation, data management and more.

Crumbs! is one of a series of biscuit books, designed to be dipped into and easily digested - just like a biscuit with tea.



        
      

      
    Published 6 October 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Building Blocks for AI and Autonomy: a Dstl biscuit book
        AI, Data Science and Machine Learning: a Dstl biscuit book
        Assurance of AI and Autonomous Systems: a Dstl biscuit book
        Dstl biscuit books
        Machine learning with limited data

  




      

    Collection

  


        Dstl biscuit books

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Scientific research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    