

Recent statutory changes to DoD organizational structures, roles, responsibilities, and authorities have introduced new challenges and opportunities that significantly affect acquisition information management and governance. This research identifies and describes specific data challenges associated with the Middle Tier of Acquisition, the Selected Acquisition Report, and the Defense Acquisition Executive Summary process and data.




Read Online

Considerations for Managing Program Data in the Emerging Acquisition Environment
Summary
by Jeffrey A. Drezner, Megan McKernan
Related Topics: Data Science, Military Acquisition and Procurement, United States Department of Defense
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download Free Electronic Document

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.1 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Acquisition program data help drive effective and efficient policy formulation, decisionmaking, and program execution across the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD). Despite recent statutory changes to organizational structures, as well as to roles, responsibilities, and authorities (RRAs) of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and military departments, OSD still needs key program data to inform policymaking and enable analysis critical for understanding acquisition processes and performance. For example, program data are still needed to conduct portfolio analyses and understand the performance of individual acquisition pathways and the overall acquisition system in order to improve acquisition policy design and outcomes.
The authors outline issues and opportunities in data requirements, governance, and management to strive for more efficient, effective, and informed acquisition while reducing burden and ad hoc data requests. They address general data governance and management challenges, as well as specific challenges associated with the Middle Tier of Acquisition (MTA) for rapid prototyping and rapid fielding, the Selected Acquisition Report (SAR), and the Defense Acquisition Executive Summary (DAES) process and data. A rich set of information currently supports the acquisition community. While there is no agreement on all data needs and definitions, the underlying data used for program management, oversight/insight, decisionmaking, and analysis are similar across DoD.

 Related Products 








Report
Issues with Access to Acquisition Information in the Department of Defense

Feb 6, 2020
Jeffrey A. Drezner, Megan McKernan, et al.






Research conducted by

RAND National Security Research Division



This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 2
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR3130.1
Document Number: RR-3130/1-OSD
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Data ScienceMilitary Acquisition and ProcurementUnited States Department of Defense

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Drezner, Jeffrey A. and Megan McKernan, Considerations for Managing Program Data in the Emerging Acquisition Environment: Summary. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR3130z1.html.
Drezner, Jeffrey A. and Megan McKernan, Considerations for Managing Program Data in the Emerging Acquisition Environment: Summary, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-3130/1-OSD, 2020. As of December 16, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR3130z1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



