
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Primary Authority Register: accessibility statement
  

  
  
  
      
  Information on the accessibility of the Primary Authority Register for users.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Office for Product Safety and Standards

      
      Published
      16 September 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          How accessible the Primary Authority Register is

        
        
          Reporting accessibility problems with the Primary Authority Register

        
        
          Enforcement procedure

        
        
          Technical information about the accessibility of the Primary Authority Register

        
        
          Non-accessible content

        
        
          What we’re doing to improve accessibility

        
        
          How we tested the Primary Authority Register

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This statement applies to the https://primary-authority.beis.gov.uk subdomain. It does not apply to content on the www.gov.uk domain published by the Office for Product Safety and Standards (OPSS).

The Primary Authority Register is run by OPSS.

How accessible the Primary Authority Register is

Parts of the Primary Authority Register are not fully accessible. For example, some document attachments are not clearly written, and some are in PDF format and not accessible.

Reporting accessibility problems with the Primary Authority Register

If you find any problems that are not listed on this page or think we’re not meeting the accessibility requirements, contact pa@beis.gov.uk. If you request a response, we’ll aim to reply within 2 working days.

Enforcement procedure

If you contact us with a complaint and you’re not happy with our response contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS).

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018 (the ‘accessibility regulations’).

Technical information about the accessibility of the Primary Authority Register

OPSS is committed to making its websites accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

The Primary Authority Register is partially compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.1 AA standard, due to the non-compliances and exemptions listed below.

Non-accessible content

The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Non-compliance with the accessibility regulations

Some headings and labels are insufficiently descriptive. This fails WCAG 2.1 2.4.6 (Headings and Labels).

The keyboard focus indicator may not be shown on a keyboard operable user interface. This fails WCAG 2.1 2.4.7 (Focus Visible).

Some content requiring user input lacks appropriate labels or instructions. This fails WCAG 2.1A 3.3.2 (Labels or Instructions).

User interface components specific to the Primary Authority Register do not give all the information needed to allow their full control via assistive technology. This fails WCAG 2.A 4.1.2 (Name, Role, Value).

We plan to fix all these issues by March 2021.

Content that is not within the scope of the accessibility regulations

The Primary Authority Register supports the operation of Primary Authority by being a forum for communications. It allows primary authorities to upload documents they have produced to manage their business partnerships and make them available to local regulators. This third-party content is neither funded nor developed by OPSS and apart from inspection plans is not under its control. As such it is exempt under section 4(2)(e) of the accessibility regulations.

What we’re doing to improve accessibility

We will:


  encourage primary authorities to ensure that the documents they upload to the Primary Authority Register are accessible
  provide all existing and any new templates for primary authorities in open document text format
  make accessibility a condition of approval for inspection plans


How we tested the Primary Authority Register

This statement was prepared on 16 September 2020.

The Primary Authority Register was last tested on 5 February 2020. The test was carried out by the Digital Accessibility Centre.

The website was given a manual technical audit with automated tools and tested by a team with differing disabilities using a range of adaptive technologies. A number of accessibility issues were reported and have been resolved apart from the non-compliance identified above.




      
        
    Published 16 September 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Primary Authority & Growth Hub Pilot Final Report
        Primary Authority: establishing partnerships
        Primary Authority terms and conditions
        Primary Authority: a guide for national regulators
        Primary Authority: a guide for enforcement officers

  




      

    Collection

  


        Primary Authority documents

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Regulation reform

  


  

  


    
  


    