
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Business relationship manager
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what a business relationship manager does and the skills you need to do the job.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of business relationship manager

        
        
          Business relationship manager

        
        
          Senior business relationship manager

        
        
          Lead business relationship manager

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This describes the role of a business relationship manager and the skills required, including:


  an introduction to the role, telling you what you would do in this role and the full list of skills
  a description of the levels in this role, from business relationship manager to lead business relationship manager, specifying the skills you need for each level and the corresponding skill level (awareness, working, practitioner, expert)


This role is part of the Digital, Data and Technology Profession in the Civil Service.

Introduction to the role of business relationship manager

A business relationship manager is responsible for acting as the liaison between the business and a selected customer group within a department to understand the operational and developmental needs of the business.

Skills required to be a business relationship manager

You will need the following skills for this role, although the level of expertise for each will vary, depending on the role level.


  
Asset and configuration management. You conduct life-cycle management for assets including: hardware, software, intellectual property, licences and warranties. This includes managing usage, disposal, compliance, inventory, sustainability, cost optimisation and protection of the asset portfolio. You help to improve investment decisions and capitalise on opportunities. You comply with international standards for asset management. You can document information relating to the assets including identification, classification and specification of all items, and information related to storage, access, versions, etc. You can apply status accounting and auditing in line with relevant criteria.
  
Business analysis (IT operations). You can visualise, articulate and solve complex problems and concepts; you know how to make disciplined decisions based on available information. You can apply logical thinking and gather and analyse information using comprehensive tools and techniques. You know how to use data to formulate both short-term day-to-day and long-term strategic plans. You can identify and analyse options, and assess feasibility and operational impact. You can ensure that the business solution aligns with the vision, mission, objectives, strategy, business and user needs and can identify and recognise a viable solution or control.
  
Continual service improvement. You know how to identify and explore opportunities for service and business improvement. You can drive analysis and can identify, prioritise and implement improvements and efficiencies, thereby ensuring that the organisation derives maximum value from services. This includes recognising the potential for automation of processes, determining the costs and benefits of new approaches and managing change or assisting implementation where needed.
  
Ownership and initiative. You can take ownership of problems and proactively resolve technical problems, ensuring that technical solutions continue to meet business requirements. You take full accountability for actions taken and decisions made.
  
Relationship management. You can identify, analyse, manage and monitor relationships with and between stakeholders. You can clarify mutual needs and commitments through the consultation and consideration of impacts. For example, you can coordinate promotional activities to one or more customers to achieve satisfaction for the customer and an acceptable return for the supplier. This will also help the customer and ensure that maximum benefit is gained from products and services supplied.
  
Service focus. You know how to maintain focus on the whole life of service delivery - designs, develops, delivers and operates. You ensure that a set of IT products, suppliers and vendors come together to deliver an IT service.
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You know the Service Management Framework principles and processes and can apply the technical knowledge in project or programme activities.
  
Service reporting. You take management information and can consolidate agreed key performance indicators (KPIs) into product or service measures that underpin service management of a specific product or service.
  
Strategic thinking. You can take an overall perspective on business issues, events, activities and can see their wider implications and long-term impact. This could include determining patterns, standards, policies, roadmaps and vision statements. You know how to focus on outcomes rather than solutions and activities.
  
Technical understanding. This specific knowledge underpins your ability to deliver the responsibilities and tasks for the role, including the application of the required breadth and depth of technical knowledge. You actively keep informed of industry developments to make cost-effective use of new and emerging tools and technologies.
  
User focus. You understand users and can identify who they are and what their needs are based on evidence. You can translate user stories and propose design approaches or services to meet these needs and engage in meaningful interactions and relationships with users. You put users first and can manage competing priorities.


Business relationship manager

A business relationship manager is responsible for the day-to-day relationships with business stakeholders, ensuring consistency in engagement across the business. At this level, you will:


  act as translators and mediators between IT operations and the business
  be the single point of contact for the business


Skills needed for this role


  
Asset and configuration management. You track, log and correct information to protect assets and components. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Business analysis (IT operations). You can investigate problems and opportunities in existing processes and contribute to recommending solutions to these. You know how to work with stakeholders to identify objectives and potential benefits available. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Continual service improvement. You can identify process optimisation opportunities with guidance and contribute to the implementation of proposed solutions. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Ownership and initiative. You know how to own an issue until a new owner has been found or the problem has been mitigated or resolved. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Relationship management. You can influence stakeholders and manage relationships effectively. You know how to build long-term strategic relationships. You can facilitate and deliver business outcomes. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Service focus. You can take inputs and establish coherent frameworks that work. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You have a Level 3 Service Management Framework qualification. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Service reporting. You produce relevant reports in a standard format in an agreed timeframe. You work with important stakeholders to discuss any changes in the reporting processes. You know how to add a commentary that provides an interpretation for the data set. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Strategic thinking. You can work within a strategic context and communicate how activities meet strategic goals. You can contribute to the development of strategy and policies. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Technical understanding. You understand core technical concepts related to the role and can apply them with guidance. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
User focus. You can identify and engage with users or stakeholders to collate user needs evidence. You define and understand research that fits user needs. You can use quantitative and qualitative data about users to turn user focus into outcomes. (Relevant skill level: working)


Senior business relationship manager

A senior business relationship manager is responsible for managing the directorate’s communication plan and its delivery. At this level, you will be expected to:


  attend business meetings and management forums
  provide communications and information for all related digital and technology activities


Skills needed for this role


  
Asset and configuration management. You know how to track, log and correct information to protect assets and components. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Business analysis (IT operations). You lead investigative work into problems and opportunities in existing processes, driving the collection of information and creation of recommendations for improvements. You can absorb large amounts of conflicting information and use it to produce solutions. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Continual service improvement. You can identify process optimisation opportunities with guidance and contribute to the implementation of proposed solutions. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Ownership and initiative. You take accountability for issues that occur and are proactive in searching for potential problems. You achieve excellent user outcomes. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Relationship management. You know how to influence stakeholders and manage relationships effectively. You can build long-term strategic relationships. You can facilitate and deliver business outcomes. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Service focus. You take inputs and establish coherent frameworks that work. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You have a Level 3 Service Management Framework qualification. You know about the product life cycle and / or capability elements of ITIL (Information Technology Infrastructure Library). (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Service reporting. You know how to produce relevant reports in a standard format to an agreed timeframe. You can work with important stakeholders to discuss any changes in the reporting processes. You know how to add a commentary that provides an interpretation for the data set. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Strategic thinking. You can work within a strategic context and communicate how activities meet strategic goals. You can contribute to the development of strategy and policies. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Technical understanding. You will know the technical concepts required in the role and understand how these fit into the wider technical landscape. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
User focus. You know how to collaborate with user researchers and can represent users internally. You understand the difference between user needs and the desires of the user. You can champion user research to focus on all users. You can prioritise and define approaches to understand the user story, guiding others in doing so. You can offer recommendations on the best tools and methods to be used. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)


Lead business relationship manager

A lead business relationship manager leads engagement with directors, corporate senior leaders, service managers and external stakeholders to ensure their complex needs are understood, prioritised and incorporated into directorate plans and that progress is communicated throughout the delivery process. At this level, you:


  are responsible for ensuring that strategic demand - such as the spending review and services strategy commitments - are met and communicated to the appropriate IT operations functions
  make a positive impact on the business through reduction of costs arising from service issues, increased efficiency and improved communication through better understanding of users’ needs and championing departmental commitment to continual improvement


Skills needed for this role


  
Asset and configuration management. You can track, log and correct information to protect assets and components. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Business analysis (IT operations). You direct business analysis, including the collection of information and evidence and the identification of problems and opportunities. You can ensure that recommendations fit with strategic business objectives. You can communicate recommendations persuasively to important stakeholders and identify the simplest approach of a variety of approaches. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Continual service improvement. You can analyse current processes, identify and implement opportunities to optimise processes, and lead and develop a team of experts to deliver service improvements. You help to evaluate and establish requirements for the implementation of changes by setting policy and standards. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Ownership and initiative. You can take accountability of issues that occur and be proactive in searching for potential problems. You know how to achieve excellent user outcomes. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Relationship management. You determine the strategic vision and direction and positively influence important senior stakeholders. You can provide an arbitration function. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Service focus. You see the bigger picture by taking groups of services and investigating how to get the best of underlying services. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Service Management Framework knowledge. You have a Level 3 Service Management Framework qualification and knowledge of product life cycle and / or capability elements of ITIL (Information Technology Infrastructure Library). (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Service reporting. You can leverage your data analytics skills to enhance business performance. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Strategic thinking. You can define strategies and policies, providing guidance to others on working in the strategic context. You know how to evaluate current strategies to ensure business requirements are being met and exceeded where possible. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Technical understanding. You know the technical concepts required for the role and understand how these fit into the wider technical landscape. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
User focus. You know how to give direction on which tools or methods to use. You have experience of meeting the needs of users across a variety of channels. You can bring insight and expertise in how user needs have changed over time to ensure these are met by the business. You know how to apply strategic thinking to provide the best service for the end user. (Relevant skill level: expert)


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs





      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Technical architect
        Content strategist
        Software developer
        Test engineer
        User researcher

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    