
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Living in Austria
  

  
  
  
      
  Information British citizens moving to or living in Austria need to know, including guidance on residency, healthcare and driving.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      10 May 2013
      Last updated
      
        6 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

        
        
          Coronavirus

        
        
          Visas and residency

        
        
          Passports and travel

        
        
          Healthcare

        
        
          Working in Austria

        
        
          Professional qualifications

        
        
          Studying in Austria

        
        
          Money, tax and banking

        
        
          Pensions

        
        
          Benefits

        
        
          Accommodation and buying property

        
        
          Driving in Austria

        
        
          Voting

        
        
          Births, deaths, marriage and civil partnerships

        
        
          Pets

        
        
          Emergencies

        
        
          Returning to the UK


        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guide sets out essential information for British citizens about moving to or living in Austria. Read about how our embassy in Austria can help.

This information is provided as a guide only. You should obtain definitive information from the Austrian authorities. The Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) is not liable for any inaccuracies in this information.

Read general guidance on moving or retiring abroad.

To stay up to date:


  
sign up for email alerts to this guidance
  follow the British Embassy in Austria on Facebook and Twitter



If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

Some parts of this guide only apply if you were living in Austria since before 1 January 2021.

You should also read our Living in Europe page for detailed guidance about citizens’ rights under the Withdrawal Agreement.

Coronavirus

You should follow the advice of the Government of Austria and your local authority. You can also read our Austria travel advice.

For information on getting a COVID-19 vaccine as a UK national in Austria see our coronavirus travel advice.

Visas and residency

If you were legally resident in Austria before 1 January 2021, you need to apply for a new ‘Article 50’ residence card.

In Vienna, you will need to make an appointment at the MA35 (local immigration office) in Arndtstrasse.

In other regions, you will need to apply at your regional authority (the “Magistrat” or “Bezirkshauptmannschaft”). Use this tool to find the responsible authority for your area (in German only).

Check in advance if coronavirus restrictions are affecting office opening times or procedures.

You are allowed to leave your home during the current lockdown to apply for an Article 50 card. If a local office is closed due to lockdown, you can make the application in writing. You will be invited to come in person when the office is open again.

You must apply for the card before 31 December 2021. Read the Austrian government guidance on the residency registration process.

If you have been living in Austria for more than 5 years

If you have been living in Austria continuously for more than 5 years, your ‘Article 50’ card will be valid for 10 years.

If you or your family members have a long-term residence certificate for EU/EEA nationals (Bescheinigung des Daueraufenthalts) or a permanent residence permit (Daueraufenthaltskarte or Daueraufenthalt-EU), you can exchange this for the new ‘Article 50’ card for free. Administrative charges might apply.

If you have permanent residency rights in Austria but do not have a long-term residence certificate (or pre-2006 equivalent), you may be asked to bring supporting documents to show you have been living in Austria.

You may also be eligible for permanent residence before 5 years, read the EU guidance on residency rights.

If you have been living in Austria for less than 5 years

If you have been living in Austria for less than 5 years, you will be eligible for an ‘Article 50’ residence card with 5 years’ validity. You will need to provide evidence of your personal situation (as a worker, student, self-sufficient person, British family member or British spouse of an Austrian national) and proof of comprehensive health insurance.

Once you have been living in Austria for 5 continuous years you will be eligible for permanent residency.

If you have a diplomatic ‘Legitimationskarte’

If you have a diplomatic legitimation card (’Legitimationskarte’) you can apply for an Article 50 residence card, but you do not need to.

If you get an Article 50 card, your legitimation card status will be changed to ‘limited immunity and privileges’ (’eingeschränkte Immunitäten und Privilegien’).

If you have a legitimation card, you should contact your employer’s human resources department for further details.

Moving to Austria

Check the entry requirements for Austria. 
Read the Austrian government’s guidance on residency permits for third country nationals.

Passports and travel

You can apply for or renew your British passport in Austria

Check the travel advice for Austria for passport validity requirements.

Always carry your passport when travelling within the Schengen area. If you have citizenship of an EU / European Free Trade Area (EFTA), in addition to your British citizenship, you should enter and leave Austria using your EU  /or EFTA passport.

If you stay in Austria with a residence permit or long-stay visa, this does not count towards your 90-day visa-free limit for the Schengen area.

If you visit other Schengen area countries outside Austria, make sure you do not exceed the visa-free 90 days in any 180-day period. You are responsible for counting how long you stay under the Schengen visa waiver, and you must comply with its conditions.

Different rules apply to EU countries that are not part of the Schengen area. Check each country’s travel advice page for information on entry requirements.

If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

When you travel, especially within the Schengen area, carry your Article 50 card or frontier worker permit issued under the Withdrawal Agreement, in addition to your valid passport.

You must proactively show your residence document, or other evidence of residence status, if you are asked to show your passport at border control. If you have applied for, but not yet received, your residence document, carry your certificate of application.

If you cannot prove that you are a resident in Austria, you may be asked additional questions at the border to enter the EU. Your passport may be stamped on entry and exit. This will not affect your rights in the country or countries where you live or work. If a passport is stamped, the stamp is considered null and void when you can show evidence of lawful residence.

If you have rights under the Withdrawal Agreement, you do not need any extra months on your passport to enter or exit EU countries.

Healthcare

Read our guidance on healthcare in Austria and make sure you are correctly registered for your circumstances.

If you’re leaving the UK with medicine that contains a controlled drug, check with the embassy about the rules for the country you’re going to before you travel and the NaTHNaC guidance on travelling with medicines.

You should also read our guidance on:


  finding an English-speaking doctor in Austria

  searching for an English-speaking doctor in Vienna

  finding English-speaking medical facilities and practitioners in Austria

  healthcare when travelling in Europe
  advice on foreign travel insurance
  bringing medicine containing a controlled drug into the UK


Mountain rescue is not covered by standard Austrian health insurance.

Working in Austria

If you are planning to come to Austria to work you may need a visa. Read the Austrian government’s guidance on work visas and migration to Austria

To apply for a job you may need to provide a:


  UK police certificate
  Austrian criminal records certificate (Strafregisterbescheinigung)


Read:


  working or providing services in Austria
  EU guidance on working in an EU country


If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

You have the right to work but you must now apply for an Article 50 residence card.

If you live in Austria and were regularly commuting to work in another EU or EFTA country before 1 January 2021, read our guidance for frontier workers.

Professional qualifications

You may need to get your professional qualification recognised if you want to work in a profession that is regulated in Austria.

If you are offering a professional service in Austria and are unsure whether your qualification or professional status is currently recognised – it may not be if you are not currently an active (fee-paying) member of the relevant business chamber – find out whether you need to take any further action:


  
ENIC NARIC is the information centre for the academic and professional recognition of qualifications
  the Austrian single point of contact for service providers

  the business chamber that covers your professional area, such as the Chamber of Lawyers, the Chamber of Auditors and Chamber of Doctors

  the Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research (teachers only)



If you are unsure which is the relevant organisation, contact the National Contact Point in Austria.

Read guidance on:


  recognition of professional qualifications
  how to get your qualification recognised in Austria



Recognition of legal qualifications

If you’re a UK-qualified lawyer working in Austria, using either an Austrian or UK professional title, you should contact the local Bar Association in the region in which you are working or the Austrian Federal Bar Association for specific advice.

If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

If the relevant regulator in Austria officially recognised your professional qualification before 1 January 2021, or you started the recognition process by this date, make sure you understand the terms of your recognition decision. Seek advice from the regulator if needed.

Studying in Austria

If you plan to study in Austria, you must meet all visa requirements before you travel.

Contact the relevant higher education provider in Austria to check what fees you may have to pay.

Read the Austrian Agency for International cooperation in Education and Research (OeAD) website for more information on entry and admission requirements.

Read guidance on:


  continuing your studies in the EU
  studying in the European Union
  healthcare for students in Austria


If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

Read about studying in the European Union for those who were already living in Austria before 1 January 2021.

Money, tax and banking

The UK has a double taxation agreement with Austria to make sure that you do not pay tax on the same income in both countries. Ask the relevant tax authority your questions about double taxation relief.

As an Austrian resident, you must declare your global income to the Austrian authorities, no matter which country it came from. You can ask the relevant tax authority about double taxation relief.

You should get professional advice on paying tax in Austria. You can find a tax adviser (Steuerberater) or accountant at Kammer der Wirtschaftstreuhänder or find an English-speaking lawyer.

Read guidance on:


  tax if you leave the UK to live abroad
  tax on your UK income if you live abroad
  paying income tax in Austria
  EU guidance on tax and customs, including online shopping from the UK
  EU guidance on customs including preferential origin
  EU guidance on excise duties


National Insurance

Find out if you need to pay National Insurance in the UK or social security contributions in Austria.


UK banking

Whether UK banks can provide services to customers living in the EEA depends on local laws and regulation.

Read the Money and Pension Service’s MoneyHelper guidance on banking, insurance and financial services changes for more information on cross-border banking.

Pensions

Read our guidance on entitlement to UK benefits and pensions while you are living in Austria.

If you are moving or retiring abroad, you must tell the UK government offices that deal with your benefits, pension and tax.

Read our State Pension guidance if you have lived in Australia, Canada or New Zealand and you are claiming or waiting to claim your UK State Pension.

If you retire in Austria, you can claim:


  your UK State Pension or new UK State Pension. Contact the International Pension Centre to claim
  your Austrian State Pension if you worked in Austria
  pensions if you’ve worked in other EU countries


Read the Money and Pension Service Moneyhelper’s guidance on pension and retirement changes for more information on cross-border pensions.

Life certificates for UK State Pensions

If you get a ‘life certificate’ from the UK Pension Service, you must respond as soon as possible - your payments may be suspended if you do not.

Benefits

Read our guidance on entitlement to UK benefits and pensions while you are living in Austria.

If you are moving or retiring abroad, you must tell the UK government offices that deal with your benefits, pension and tax.

Check which UK benefits you can claim while abroad and how to claim them.

Many income-related benefits such as pension credit and housing benefit cannot be paid to you if you’re abroad for more than 4 weeks.

You can request proof from HMRC of the time you’ve worked in the UK and of your UK National Insurance record.

Austrian benefits

You may be eligible to claim some Austrian social security benefits.

If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021

If you were lawfully resident in Austria before 1 January 2021 and continue to live in Austria, you have the same access to Austrian benefits as EU nationals. Until 31 December 2021, this is not dependent on having applied for or received your Article 50 card.

You may be eligible to claim some Austrian social security benefits.

Accommodation and buying property

Property ownership laws in Austria vary by province.

Read guidance on how to buy a property abroad.

Driving in Austria

If you are resident in Austria, you must exchange your UK licence for an Austrian one within 6 months of arriving. If you were living in Austria before 1 January 2021, you must now exchange your UK licence for an Austrian one if you wish to drive in Austria.

For information on driving in Austria, read our guidance on:


  what you need to drive abroad

  driving rules in Austria


If you are resident in Austria and your UK driving licence is lost, stolen or expires, you will not be able to renew it with the UK Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). You will need to apply to the DVLA for a ‘certificate of entitlement’ in German to be able to apply for an Austrian driving licence.

Driving in the UK with an Austrian licence

You can use your Austrian licence in the UK for short visits, or exchange it for a UK licence without taking a test.

Bringing a UK-registered vehicle to Austria

Read our guidance on taking a vehicle out of the UK.

If you bring your personal vehicle with you from the UK when moving to Austria, you have to apply for an exemption (“Abgabenbefreieung”) to not pay any import duty. If you import a car from the UK after moving to Austria, you will have to pay import duties based on the value of your car, and potentially tariffs, depending on the origin of the vehicle.

Read the Austrian government’s guidance on taxes when moving to Austria.

You can also read the European Union’s guidance on car registration rules and taxes in Austria.

Third-party car insurance (Haftpflichtversicherung) is compulsory in Austria.

If you have your main residence in Austria, you may use your car with foreign number plates for one month in Austria. You must register your car, pay a one-off fuel consumption tax called NoVA (Normverbrauchsabgabe) at your local tax office and exchange your UK number plates for Austrian plates at your nearest vehicle registration office (Kfz-Zulassungsstelle).

You need proof of insurance before you can get your number plates (Autokennzeichen) and car registration document (Zulassungsschein). Your insurer can advise you how to get these.

Voting

You cannot vote in general, regional or local elections in Austria.

You may be able to vote in some UK elections. You can:


  check if you are able to vote
  register as an overseas voter


Births, deaths, marriage and civil partnerships

If your child is born in Austria, you will need to register a birth abroad.

If someone dies in Austria you can read our guidance on:


  what to do after someone dies abroad
  bereavement in Austria
  finding English-speaking funeral directors in Austria



Find out how you can get married or a civil partnership abroad.

You may also need:


  
notarial and documentary services for British nationals in Austria
  English-speaking lawyers in Austria
  translators and interpreters in Austria


Pets

If you have a pet passport issued by Austria or another EU member state, you can use it to travel with your pet to Great Britain and elsewhere in the EU.

A GB-issued EU pet passport is not valid for travel to the EU or Northern Ireland. You should speak to your vet before you travel to get the necessary pet travel documents and ensure you’re compliant with the EU Pet Travel Regulations.

Read guidance on:


  bringing your pet to GB
  travelling with your pet in the EU
  travelling to Northern Ireland with your pet


Check the rules of the country you’re travelling to for any additional restrictions or requirements before you travel.

Emergencies

You can dial the European emergency number 112 in Austria for the police, ambulance or fire brigade, or dial:


  122 for the fire brigade
  128 for gas-related emergencies
  133 for police
  140 for mountain rescue
  141 for doctors
  142 for telephone counselling
  144 for rescue/ambulance
  147 for emergency services for children and young people
  116 000 for reporting missing children


If you’re the victim of a crime, have been arrested, or are affected by a crisis abroad, contact the British embassy Vienna.

Returning to the UK


Check the COVID-19 travel guidance for entering the UK.

Tell the Austrian and UK authorities if you are returning to the UK permanently. To help prove you are now living in the UK, you should de-register with your:


  local registration office (Gemeindeamt or Magistrat)
  health insurance provider (Krankenkasse)
  bank and local service providers


To move your pension to the UK, contact the International Pension Centre and your local social insurance organisation.

If you get healthcare in Austria through the S1 form, you must contact the Overseas Healthcare Team on +44 (0)191 218 1999 and your local social insurance organisation to make sure your S1 is cancelled at the right time.

Read the guidance on returning to the UK permanently which includes information on, amongst other things, bringing family members, tax and access to services.

If you return to the UK permanently and meet the ordinarily resident test, you’ll be able to access NHS care without charge.

Useful information

Support for British nationals abroad: a guide sets out how to stay safe abroad, and explains how the FCDO can support you if you get into difficulty.





      
        
    Published 10 May 2013
    Last updated 6 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 December 2021
              Added information on applying for an Article 50 card during lockdown. UK nationals living in Austria before 1 January 2021 have until 31 December 2021 to apply for an Article 50 card and secure their residency rights.
            
            
              12 August 2021
              Guidance reviewed for Passports and travel, Healthcare, Working in Austria, Professional qualifications, Studying in Austria, Money, tax and banking, Benefits, Births, deaths, marriages and civil partnerships, Emergencies,  Returning to the UK and Useful information sections.
            
            
              29 July 2021
              Professional qualifications section updated for British citizens who are moving or moved to Austria after 1 January 2021 and those living there since before 1 January 2021.
            
            
              29 June 2021
              Working in Austria section updated: new guidance for frontier workers
            
            
              4 May 2021
              Visas and residency section updated with information for holders of legitimation cards.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              Link added to new embassy online Q&A session on Wed 21 April; Healthcare section updated including guidance on the S1 form and applying for EHIC and GHIC cards; Education section updated with information on funding eligibility for students and link to Department for International Trade (DIT) guidance on recognition of professional qualifications; Working in Austria section updated with link to DIT guidance on working or providing services.
            
            
              1 March 2021
              Driving section update: additional information on importing vehicles from the UK
            
            
              15 February 2021
              Benefits section updated on access to Austrian benefits.
            
            
              15 February 2021
              Coronavirus section updated with a link to guidance on vaccines.
            
            
              14 January 2021
              Visas and residency section updated on where to apply for the new Article 50 residence card
            
            
              31 December 2020
              Updated as the transition period ends with new information on pet travel and moving to Austria
            
            
              22 December 2020
              Driving in Austria section updated - date by which residents need to exchange licence
            
            
              16 December 2020
              Passports and travel section updated on carrying proof of residence when travelling.
            
            
              23 November 2020
              Residency section updated to explain the new ‘Article 50’ residence card.
            
            
              10 November 2020
              Healthcare section updated on how to apply for a new UK EHIC as a student or S1 holder. Working section updated with information on frontier workers
            
            
              7 October 2020
              Visas and Residency section updated with further information on the new residency system
            
            
              8 September 2020
              Passports and travel section updated to include information on passport validity and entry requirements when travelling to other European countries from January 2021
            
            
              3 July 2020
              Added a link to embassy Q&A events, before an online Q&A on Monday 6 July 2020. You can ask questions from midday - 2pm Austrian time on the embassy's facebook page www.facebook.com/ukinaustria.
            
            
              23 January 2020
              Brexit update: includes further details on passport validity, healthcare rights and State Pension uprating if the UK leaves the EU with a deal.
            
            
              18 October 2019
              Brexit update: healthcare section updated to reflect transitional arrangements announcement
            
            
              3 September 2019
              Brexit update: Pensions section updated to include further details on State Pension uprating.
            
            
              27 August 2019
              Brexit update: Added guidance to "Passports and travel after Brexit" section for UK nationals travelling from Austria before Brexit and returning afterwards.  Added information to the Visas & Residency section: "If the UK leaves the EU with a deal, British nationals must apply for a new residence permit within 6 months of Brexit."
            
            
              16 April 2019
              EU Exit update: updated "Passports and Travel after the UK leaves the EU" and "Returning to the UK" sections
            
            
              1 April 2019
              Added guidance under "Passports and travel after EU Exit" for recommended travel documentation if the UK leaves the EU without a deal.
            
            
              27 March 2019
              Updated information on residency, visas, healthcare, driving, education and professional qualifications, pensions and passports to reflect latest information on the UK's departure from the EU.
            
            
              12 March 2019
              We have updated the contact details you need to apply for an S1 form.
            
            
              22 February 2019
              Updated information on passports: you must use the checker tool to see if your passport is still valid for your trip
            
            
              12 February 2019
              EU Exit update: New English language website link to the Austrian Federal Chancellery Brexit page
            
            
              29 January 2019
              EU Exit update: updated information on access to healthcare
            
            
              28 January 2019
              EU Exit update: Added new Brexit Q&A event dates in Salzburg, Styria, Lower Austria, Vienna, Upper Austria, Tyrol, Vorarlberg, Carinthia and Burgenland
            
            
              18 January 2019
              EU Exit update: updated information on pensions and driving
            
            
              17 January 2019
              EU Exit update: added web link to new Austrian government page about Brexit preparations in EU Exit section
            
            
              22 November 2018
              EU Exit update: New information in residency and visa section on draft withdrawal agreement in principle between the UK and EU. Plus information on travelling with pets in Europe in pet section
            
            
              21 November 2018
              Brexit update: "Visas and Residency" section updated to reflect the wording from the Austrian Government about requirements for the registration certificate and long-term residency certificate.
            
            
              24 October 2018
              Link to citizens outreach meetings
            
            
              23 April 2018
              Complete revision of guidance to ensure it's up to date and accurate.
            
            
              9 May 2017
              Information on healthcare access updated.
            
            
              1 July 2015
              Update to entry and residence requirements
            
            
              1 July 2013
              Added links to Life Certificate witness options document
            
            
              28 June 2013
              Life Certificate section - updates requested by BE Vienna Consular section.
Notary search website address added - update requested by BE Vienna Consular Section.
            
            
              10 May 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Living in Estonia
        Living in Slovakia
        Living in Croatia
        Healthcare for UK nationals living in Iceland
        Living in Luxembourg
        Austria travel advice

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Austria: notarial and documentary services
        Living in Europe: citizens' rights if you moved before 1 January 2021
        Healthcare for UK nationals living in Austria
        Travel to Austria for work

  




      

    Collection

  


        Living in country guides

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Europe

  


  

  


    
  


    