
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Open general export licence: exports under the US-UK defence trade co-operation treaty
  

  
  

  
    
  Licence for the export or transfer of military goods or technology under the US-UK Defence Trade Co-operation Treaty from the UK to the US.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      22 May 2012
      Last updated
      
        7 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence: export under the US-UK defence trade co-operation treaty 
    
        PDF, 269KB, 13 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Revoked: Open general export licence: export under the US-UK defence trade co-operation treaty
    
        PDF, 734KB, 13 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This open general export licence (OGEL) allows, subject to certain conditions, the export or transfer of military goods or technology under the US-UK Defence Trade Co-operation Treaty from the UK to the US.

This version of the licence is available for registration.

This permission is with the limitation that the licence is only used by members of the ‘Approved Community’ and provided that the ultimate end-user of the goods or technology is the US or UK government.

What is the ‘Approved Community’ and how do you get onto the list

Organisations that comprise the UK ‘Approved Community’ are defined by Article 4(1) of the treaty. 

To qualify for membership of the ‘Approved Community’, private companies must satisfy the UK and US due diligence approval process and meet specific security requirements. This includes adhering to the relevant provisions of the UK government’s Security Policy Framework (SPF). The process for applying for ‘Approved Community’ status is described on the MOD website in Industrial Security Notice 2012-01. Download Industrial Security Notices.

This guidance is issued in the context of the SPF published by the Cabinet Office. The Defence Trade Co-operation Treaty provisions in the SPF can only be accessed by non-Governmental entities in the DTCT (US-UK Defence Trade Co-operation Treaty) ‘Approved Community’ via the MOD Defence Equipment and Support Infrastructure Security website after formal registration, which is a mandated condition of ‘Approved Community’ membership. Details on how to access the website provisions will be provided during the registration process.

You should also refer to the guidance for UK ‘Approved Community’ companies issued by the MOD. This document concerns the procedures in 4 different scenarios when a UK ‘Approved Community’ facility wishes to either:


  re-transfer items to a ‘Non-Approved Community’  entity in the UK
  re-export items to a ‘Non-Approved Community’ entity overseas for return to a UK ‘Approved Community’ entity
  re-export to a ‘Non-Approved Community’ entity overseas for its end-use
  re-export by a MOD entity to a ‘Non-Approved Community’ entity overseas for its end-use


Reporting requirements
These OGELs are subject to reporting requirements under the open licence returns transparency initiative.

Revoked licences

The most recent revoked licence is available in the documents section.

You can find older revoked versions of the OGEL: exports under the US-UK defence trade co-operation treaty on the National Archives website.




        
      

      
    Published 22 May 2012
    Last updated 7 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 June 2021
              This licence has been amended to take into account changes to the list of defence-related products.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              This Open General Export Licence has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              17 December 2020
              This OGEL has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              24 July 2018
              Republished to clarify that an approved F1686 can be considered a written letter of approval from MOD.
            
            
              6 April 2018
              Licence updated and amended to reflect new contact details for the Export Control Joint Unit.
            
            
              5 March 2018
              Two entries: ML8.a.41 (explosive) and ML8.h (reactive materials) have been added to the list of non-permitted entries on this licence.
            
            
              13 July 2017
              Licence updated to reflect amendments to the Export Control Order 2008 that came into force on 13 July 2017.
            
            
              1 March 2017
              This licence has been republished to reflect amendments to the Export Control Order 2008.
            
            
              6 October 2015
              Amendments to rating code PL5001. Clause added referring to pre-visit questionnaires.
            
            
              13 June 2014
              Licence amended to reflect the new Government Security Classification System.
            
            
              1 January 2014
              Updated to reflect new reporting process in connection with the transparency initiative.
            
            
              22 May 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Implementing the UK-US Defense Trade Cooperation Treaty
        UK/USA: Treaty concerning Defense Trade Cooperation [TS No.26/2013]

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  




      

    World locations

  


        USA

  


  

  


    
  


    