Airplanes and their jet fuel (more specifically, the carbon-packed emissions generated when airplanes fly) pose a real – and growing – hurdle to reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector. Despite becoming 130% more efficient since 1978, airplanes are still responsible for 2% of the CO emissions caused by humans and 11% of U.S. transportation-related emissions. According to the International Air Transport Association (IATA), the industry is expected to double within the next 15 years, and it is impractical to electrify or power airplanes with batteries for long-distance flights. Those who fly the sky need to pursue new fuels and technologies, just as the automotive and power industries have done. On September 9, the White House issued a  to inspire an increase in the production of sustainable aviation fuels (SAFs) to at least 3 billion gallons per year by 2030 and potentially to 35 billion gallons by 2050. By reducing costs, enhancing sustainability, and expanding production and use of SAFs, the aviation industry may be able to cut greenhouse gas emissions in half compared to conventional fuel. The grand challenge outlines a greener pathway to cleaner, bluer skies. But, where to begin? Scientists at the Department of Energy’s Argonne National Laboratory (know the answer. Innovative thinkers at Argonne, led by Michael Wang, developed the Greenhouse gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in Technologies (GREET) model in the mid-1990s to evaluate and compare the energy and environmental impacts of various fuels and vehicles. It draws on data from the Environmental Protection Agency, the Energy Information Administration, federal research, leading simulation programs and tools, peer-reviewed publications and a wealth of data from industry and government agencies. a. ILUC of soybean biodiesel in GREET is 9.28 gCO2e/MJ BD. This has been converted into per MJ jet considering soybean BD and jet yields.
b. Heat integration between ethanol and jet fuel production is considered.
c. Evaluated using GREET 2017 with the datasets provided by LanzaTech assuming standalone ETJ for ICAO CORSIA.