On the heels of our new research, , McKinsey convened a group of experts at COP26 on Tuesday to discuss how finance institutions can innovate to address climate risks. “We are substantially underinvesting in adaptation today,” says McKinsey Partner Mekala Krishnan. “The pace and scale of adaptation investments needs to substantially rise to protect communities and make companies and businesses more resilient.”Tuesday also marked Gender Day at COP26, and Kathy Baughman McLeod, senior vice president of the Adrienne Arsht Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center, shared a statistic that reminded guests of the disproportionate impact women face from those risks: They are 14 times  in a disaster than men. “A lot of that is about the role of a woman in the family to care for the animals or care for the children,” McLeod said. Excerpts from the entire discussion, edited for clarity, are below. A replay of today’s session can be found . Please visit our  to register for upcoming sessions. “.”
—Nicholas Stern, IG Patel Professor of Economics and Government and Chair, Grantham Research Institute at LSE  “.”
—Kathy Baughman McLeod, senior vice president and director, Adrienne Arsht Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center, Atlantic Council “.”
—Daniel Klier, president, Arabesque Holding and CEO, Arabesque S-Ray “.”
—Daniel Klier, president, Arabesque Holding and CEO, Arabesque S-Ray “.”
—Anil Kishora, vice president, New Development Bank “.”
—Alice Hill, senior fellow for energy and the environment, Council on Foreign AffairsOn Monday evening, Paulina Paz Aldunce Ide, a professor at the University of Chile professor, and Nigel Topping, UK high level champion for climate action COP26, joined McKinsey partner  for a fireside chat on the  campaign, which examines the humanitarian impact of a changing climate. Examples of the financial implications of climate risk can be found worldwide. In Florida, McKinsey’ s analysis estimates that the projected increase in tidal flooding frequency and severity could result in a $10 billion to $30 billion devaluation in exposed properties by 2030, and $30 billion to $80 billion by 2050, all else being equal.Learn more about adaptation and resilience with these McKinsey articles: