In response to the coronavirus outbreak and to lockdown measures, companies around the globe have moved to remote work and shifted their operations online. These moves can also create new openings for cyberattacks. Leaders are balancing business continuity and the speed at which they must adapt to digital solutions against the need to protect their organization, people, and customers.
    
    
The good news is that they can deploy several strategies to maintain a robust cybersecurity program. In this podcast, McKinsey partner Jim Boehm discusses the hallmarks of a stepped-up cybersecurity program. Key actions to strengthen an organization against cyberthreats include the following:
    Assess the risks and rewards associated with moving the business online, and determine which controls can be temporarily relaxed and which vulnerabilities must be shored up immediately.
    Improve work-from-home security by building a resilient workforce, improving tooling and authentication, and, to support employees, updating processes and communication.
    Strengthen the security of videoconferencing solutions by evaluating the ease of use and other business features of the organization’s videoconferencing capabilities, and ensure that built-in security controls are enabled.
    Focus on practical mitigation of risk, making sure that small measures which can make a large difference are taken and done well.
For more details, please listen to the podcast or read the full transcript below. You can also learn more by reading “,” “,” and “.”Podcast transcript Hello and welcome. You are listening to a podcast by McKinsey & Company, focused on COVID-19 response. My name is Amanda Schmitt, and I’m the Global Risk Learning Manager at McKinsey & Company. Today I’ll be speaking with Jim Boehm, a partner in McKinsey’s Washington, DC, office and an expert in cybersecurity. Jim is going to walk us through some ways to protect ourselves in the midst of the crisis, in light of how much global digital transformation it is causing. Jim, first question for you: What would you say are the top cybersecurity concerns for clients right now? They really fall into two areas. The first is supporting continuity of operations, and the second is protecting the institution and their customers. So let me touch on both of those just briefly.In terms of continuity of operations, there is a massive increase in the number of collaboration tools that our clients are procuring and installing. Security is an important part of both of those processes, and so they’re getting pulled into those efforts on a pretty regular basis. They’re also surging a lot of capacities to support remote-working initiatives. The other thing we’re seeing is companies’ risk tolerances change. Their risk appetite has shifted more towards being oriented on continuing operations, making sure the business is supported and the frontline employees get what they need. So, in some cases, clients are even relaxing controls or issuing waivers for certain capabilities, just to ensure that operations continue. And from my own perspective, I think that makes a good deal of sense right now. People are struggling. Companies are really trying to just survive in many cases, and now is the time to take a look at risk appetite and to really be thoughtful about that risk and reward trade-off of really 100 percent adhering to the controls that the institution needs to be putting in place. Now, all that said, for any controls that are relaxed or waivers that are granted, you know, you need to be cataloging those things to go back and revisit them. Those are the things that companies are doing on the continuity of operation side. In terms of protecting the institution, there are many vulnerabilities. Many of them have been publicized with videoconferencing capabilities or other remote-working capabilities. And the teams are really working around the clock to find and fix those vulnerabilities. We’ve also seen not an increase in top-level attacks, but we’ve seen a ton of attacks that have shifted, in terms of proportion, towards pandemic-related themes. So these are pandemic-related phishing emails that purport to be from public-health institutions or government institutions, to distribute money, to even “smishing,” which are SMS- or text-based phishing, or “vishing,” which are voice-mail- or video-based phishing attacks, where you’ll have an attacker posing as, say, a member of the help-desk team of your company, your client’s company, offering to help reset credentials and those sorts of things.So not only is the security team trying to support ongoing continuity of operations and fielding new capabilities, but they’re also trying to rapidly close those vulnerabilities as quickly as they can and they’re trying to respond to attacks all at the same time—while being worried about, again, themselves, their teams, their families, and just the overall disruption that this pandemic has brought to the globe. Jim, what should clients be doing to improve work-from-home security? So, in many ways, the shift to work-from-home is the largest digital transformation that any company has ever gone through. And when you look at that on a global scale, this is probably the largest digital transformation the world has ever seen. So it does mean that we have to change the way we work.There are three different areas where we see clients really working to improve work-from-home security. The first is what we’re calling the “resilient workforce.” So this is frontline employees changing their behaviors, changing their practices. And to do that, companies need to communicate with employees. We need to focus on what employees can do rather than telling them what they can’t do. So if we have a security concern around a certain piece of technology, we need to help them understand those concerns, but then give them an opportunity or an option to use something else that is an equivalent, that is more secure. And then also increasing their awareness of social engineering and other attacks, like we were just talking about.The second category of things that clients are doing to improve work-from-home security is they’re improving their tooling. They’re accelerating patches. They’re accelerating, in some cases, device virtualization. They’re scaling multifactor authentication. So they’re really implementing strong authentication technologies, computing technologies, virtualization technologies, and other remote-working technologies to enable their employees to get their job done. The most famous one that’s being talked about are videoconferencing technologies. So we see a lot of companies, as these things are getting rapidly procured and implemented, really scrambling to identify and close the vulnerabilities associated with them. So that’s the second thing.The last category is what we’re calling “the way we work.” It’s sort of the processes that companies follow. In this category are things like providing support as employees install the tools that we just talked about, in terms of the second category of work. But there’s a whole process of installation that, oftentimes, the security teams are needing to support employees on.We’re seeing really strong processes, in terms of incident-response playbooks getting implemented—how a company responds to an incident and breaking down some of those barriers between teams, just by having good process and good open lines of communication—so that if an incident does happen, it can be quickly identified. That’s very important in a work-from-home context.And then we’re even seeing some processes around how to deal with things like securing physical documents. In a lot of our regulated industries, banking and insurance, sometimes certain decisions or certain processes need to be documented through physical documentation, through printing. And, in most cases, people’s home printers are not as secure as the ones that we would utilize in an office. So we’re seeing good processes get put in place to ensure that the right levels of control are around the physical documents that are getting printed, to make sure that they don’t end up just in household trash or otherwise become a source for data leakage. Jim, you mentioned videoconferencing. How should concerns about videoconference technologies be addressed? Yeah, this is a hot topic right now, isn’t it? So, look, the current situation has accelerated videoconferencing adoption, I think, more than any external push that we’ve ever seen. And there are many companies right now who have videoconferencing capabilities who are really coming under a lot of scrutiny.At McKinsey, we use videoconferencing extensively, and I think those questions are the right questions to ask. We should be concerned about videoconferencing, just as we’re concerned about voice communications or carrier pigeons. Any method of communication can get intercepted and used for things other than what was intended. Videoconferencing is no different.I think the way we need to think about those concerns, though, is from a risk perspective. I don’t know of a single videoconferencing capability out there that doesn’t have known vulnerabilities, that hasn’t had pretty significant vulnerabilities surfaced by security researchers, and that companies haven’t had to address. This is true of videoconferencing capabilities that were coming online in 2014, 2015. A lot of them were really starting to gain traction in 2017, 2018, and then we’ve had some more recent entrants that have, you know, great facilitation in terms of ease of use—they’re very frictionless, they’ve had high adoption rates during this pandemic. But now they’re starting to have questions asked about some of their capabilities, as well.So, in terms of thinking about the concerns around videoconferencing technologies, I think that we need to be very clear-eyed about the fact that none of these capabilities are perfect. They’ve all had vulnerabilities identified, tested, and mitigated over time. And ultimately the reason we’re using these technologies is to facilitate human interaction in a time when it’s otherwise impossible.The right answer is not to turn off our videoconferences and go back to telephone or semaphore or some other form of communication. The right approach, I think, is to evaluate the ease of use and other business features that your company has gone through to select a single or a suite of videoconferencing capabilities, and then ensure that those capabilities are being used with the right security controls—that are oftentimes built into these tools—turned on and enabled. This could be things like waiting rooms before meetings start. This could be things like enforcing the use of passwords to be able to join a videoconference. So I think a lot of the focus on individual videoconference technologies and individual videoconference providers right now is actually pretty unhelpful.What I would rather have the media and others focus on is how you can employ best-practice security in really any video-conference technology that you use, and what are the steps to make sure that you’re securing those conversations, just as we talked about how to secure phone conversations or email conversations or other forms of communications.As we wrap things up, what would you say are the two or three things that listeners should take away from this podcast? So, as we look ahead to the next normal, whatever that ends up looking like—and I think the jury’s very much still out on that—the three things that I would really emphasize: They’re in the midst of the largest digital transformation that they’ve probably ever experienced. The second is security absolutely has to be a part of this conversation, or they’re leaving themselves wide open to a massive amount of risk. And then the third is there are some very practical things that companies can do to mitigate that risk. And it doesn’t necessarily mean spending a ton of money, and it doesn’t necessarily mean spending years doing some sort of massive security transformation. It’s doing little things really, really well that actually make the difference between being breached and being secure.