If the fashion industry proceeds with its current greenhouse gas emissions trajectory, estimated in 2018 to equal 4 percent of the world’s total, it will miss its 1.5-degree Celsius pathway by 50 percent. Most of the fashion industry’s emissions came from upstream activities—such as materials production, preparation, and processing—while the remainder were associated with downstream retail operations, the use-phase, and end-of-use activities. The industry’s extensive emissions, however, can still be curbed.Reducing emissions in order to align with the  outlined by the Paris Agreement would require players from the entire fashion value chain to collaborate and embrace new ways of working together. We estimate that the industry can reduce its annual emissions to around 1.1 billion tons—or around half of today’s figure—but it will require significant additional effort beyond current decarbonization activities. This ‘accelerated abatement’ requires fashion industry stakeholders to reduce emissions across the entire value chain, from upstream production and processing, through retail operations, to the consumers themselves. In new research we conducted with the Global Fashion Agenda, we outline a roadmap for how the industry could do it:Fortunately, these recommended actions are aligned with the latest customer survey research.  conducted in April 2020 shows more than 60 percent of respondents go out of their way to recycle and purchase products in environmentally friendly packaging. However, to successfully proceed, brands will need to encourage participation even further by transparently communicating with their customers about best practices for sustainable fashion.Players across fashion’s value chain must continue to drive their own sustainability efforts while collaborating on new strategies to keep the industry on the 1.5-degree pathway beyond 2030. Without these partnerships between key players, the fashion industry will not successfully reach its sustainability goal.The good news for the industry is that more than half of the levers required to achieve our accelerated abatement scenario actually generate savings on an industry-wide basis. Compared to other industries, this approach is financially achievable—89 percent of abatement can be achieved at a cost of less than $50 per ton of GHG emissions. While around 60 percent of these actions require upfront investment, 55 percent of them will lead to net cost savings for the industry overall.The COVID-19 pandemic has shown us that consumers expect more from their brands in times of crisis. In fact,  consider a brand’s promotion of sustainability to be an important purchasing factor. The public’s demand for brands to take responsibility, understand their own emissions and abatement levers, collaborate with partners to decarbonize the value chain, and work with stakeholders to build a less emissions-intensive product lifecycle is a critical catalyst for accelerated abatement. Now is the time for the industry to think radically and embrace business model transformations to deliver sustainable outcomes.