
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Berwyn Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Berwyn is a men’s prison in Wrexham, North Wales.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      16 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        28 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Berwyn

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Berwyn

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Berwyn

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Berwyn

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.


Book and plan your visit to Berwyn


Berwyn is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 2 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


At Berwyn, prisoners are responsible for booking their own visits. These must generally be booked at least 2 days in advance.

Up to 3 adults plus 2 children, can visit at a time. At least one visitor must be 18 or older.

Contact Berwyn if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Berwyn
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits
Berwyn is running a limited visits schedule. Visits are also happening differently than normal, observing strict guidelines, which must be followed.

You can book your visit by telephone or you can also register to use the secure video calls service. There is no online booking service available.

Booking line: 01978 523300
The booking line is open Monday to Friday, 8am to 5pm
Find out about call charges

Visiting times:


  Monday: 8:45am to 9:45am, 10:30am to 11:30am, 2pm to 3pm and 3:45pm to 4:45pm
  Tuesday: 8:45am to 9:45am, 10:30am to 11:30am and 2pm to 4pm
  Wednesday: 8:45am to 9:45am, 10:30am to 11:30am, 2pm to 3pm and 3:45pm to 4:45pm
  Thursday:  8:45am to 9:45am, 10:30am to 11:30am and 2pm to 4pm
  Friday: 8:45 to 9:45am, 10:30am to 11:30am
  Saturday: 9am to 10am, 10:45am to 11:45am, 2pm to 3pm and 3:45pm to 4:45pm
  Sunday: 9am to 10am, 10:45am to 11:45am, 2pm to 3pm and 3:45pm to 4:45pm


How to book legal and professional visits

There are currently no legal visits taking place.

Getting to Berwyn
Find Berwyn on a map

Berwyn is about 4 miles from Wrexham General and Wrexham Central stations. A number of local buses from Wrexham town centre pass the prison. There is also a taxi rank at each station.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



There is parking at the prison, including spaces for Blue Badge holders.

Entering Berwyn
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison. Read the list of acceptable forms of ID for all visitors..

All visitors will need to be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Visitors should dress appropriately. You may be turned away if you are wearing items like revealing clothing or clothing with offensive slogans. Ask at the visitors centre if you have questions about appropriate dress.

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Berwyn. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker or with security. This includes pushchairs and car seats.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There is a visitors centre run by the Prison Advice and Care Trust (PACT) charity.

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

The childrens play areas are currently not available to use.

Email: berwyn@prisonadvice.org.uk 
Telephone: 01978 523004
Find out about call charges

Family days
There are currently no family days being run.

Keep in touch with someone at Berwyn
There are several ways you can keep in touch with someone during their time at Berwyn.

Phone calls
Prisoners have phones in their rooms and are able to make calls at any time.

Phones do not accept incoming calls so they will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Email
You can send emails to someone in Berwyn using the Email a Prisoner service.

You are able to attach photos for an additional charge and receive replies.

Emails are monitored.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Berwyn.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts
You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
People in Berwyn are given a list of items that they can buy from approved suppliers through a catalogue system.

They can also apply to receive a clothing parcel once or twice a year depending on their length of time in prison and their behaviour level. These parcels cannot be posted in and must be handed in to staff during a visit. All items will be opened and checked by officers.

Friends and families of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.

For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Life at Berwyn
Berwyn is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men can learn new skills to help them on release.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Berwyn has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by the North Wales Safeguarding Board.

Arrival and first night
When someone first arrives at Berwyn, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs.

Extra attention is taken on arrival to make the prisoner as comfortable as possible. Several checks are made on the prisoner through the evening.

Induction
Each person who arrives at Berwyn gets an induction that lasts about a week. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Over 2000 men live at Berwyn in a mixture of single and shared rooms. All rooms have a shower, toilet, hand basin and a phone for outgoing calls.

Each pirsoner is given a Unilink laptop for making applications, ordering canteen items and booking visits. They can also use it to access the Content Hub, a rich source of educational materials, information, news and entertainment.

Prisoners have access to a full-sized sports hall, weights and fitness room and outdoor pitches. The fitness programme includes a range of team sports and classes leading to accredited qualifications.

Berwyn Prison has a diverse, multi-faith chaplaincy team providing support to prisoners. All religious festivals are catered for.

Education and work
Prisoners have access to a broad programme of learning opportunities provided by Novus Cambria. These range from basic skills, such as literacy, Welsh and numeracy, to vocational qualifications and higher learning.

Vocational qualifications include digital media, business enterprise, art, information and communications technology (ICT) and performing arts.

The programme also includes training in a variety of trades and professions, such as:


  bricklaying
  joinery
  horticulture
  plastering
  industrial cleaning


Work is available throughout the prison in areas such as the laundry, waste management and industrial cleaning. Prisoners can also work in one of Berwyn’s industrial workshops, which include a call centre and a DHL distribution centre. Prisoners can earn qualifications while working, for example in performing manufacturing operations and customer service.

Berwyn also runs a number of accredited offending behaviour programme courses. The college also provides personal and social courses in positive thinking and family learning.

Guidance workers provide prisoners with information and advice throughout their studies and work coaches provide individual support to prisoners in finding work on release.

Temporary release
Some prisoners may qualify for release on temporary licence. This can be used to gain work experience in the local community and prepare for release. Prisoners can apply for this within the prison.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Support at Berwyn
PACT can provide information, guidance and support to families and friends of prisoners.

You can ask for more information in the visitors centre or contact them by email and telephone.

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Berwyn. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

Contact Berwyn
Governor: Nick Leader

Telephone (24 hours): 01978 523 000
Find out about call charges

Follow Berwyn on Twitter

Address


HMP Berwyn
Bridge Road
Wrexham Industrial Estate
Wrexham
North Wales
LL13 9QE



See map

Safer custody hotline
If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a man in Berwyn, contact the safer custody team.

Telephone: 01978 523 772
Find out about call charges

Leave as much information as possible about the prisoner and your concerns, as well as your contact details. Messages are checked regularly throughout the day and night.

In an emergency, call the main telephone number and ask to speak to the orderly officer or duty governor.


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minute survey.





      
        
    Published 16 June 2020
    Last updated 28 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 October 2021
              Updated number for PACT family services
            
            
              25 August 2021
              Added link to information about testing for physical contact at visits.
            
            
              11 May 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              7 April 2021
              Prison moved into National Stage 3 framework and is now preparing to open visits for family, friends and significant others. We will update this page with specific visiting information as soon as possible.
            
            
              6 January 2021
              Covid update
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visiting information.
            
            
              13 November 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new coronavirus rules in Wales.
            
            
              23 October 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions. 
            
            
              15 September 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              26 June 2020
              updated visiting facilities contact email address
            
            
              16 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Ford Prison
        Birmingham Prison
        Foston Hall Prison and Young Offender Institution
        Gartree Prison
        Woodhill Prison

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    