
								



Hsiang brings extensive experience in government digital delivery and will be the first woman to lead the agency





Today, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
announced
 Mina Hsiang as the new Administrator of the United States Digital Service (USDS). Hsiang is only the third Administrator since the USDS was created in 2014, and she will be the first woman and first Asian-American to lead the agency.





“Since its creation, the United States Digital Service has served as a cornerstone of innovation by uniquely focusing on human-centered solutions to government’s most pressing technical problems. As USDS Administrator, Mina brings a wealth of government digital delivery experience, as well as the leadership to continue cultivating the extraordinary talent at USDS and delivering better services for the American people,” 
said OMB Acting Director Shalanda Young
.





Hsiang is an engineer with extensive experience in government digital delivery. During the Obama-Biden Administration, she was a key member of the HealthCare.gov delivery team and went on to become an early team member of USDS, serving as founding Executive Director of the Digital Service at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).  Most recently, Hsiang served on the Biden-Harris Transition, as part of the HHS agency review team and working on the COVID-19 transition team. She carried that work into the Administration in early 2021 as Senior Advisor for Delivery at USDS, where she successfully led the delivery team for the rollout of the Vaccines.gov integrated consumer experience. Hsiang’s comprehensive practice in the health technology space also includes her contributions to both President Obama’s Precision Medicine Initiative and the Obama Administration’s U.S. Chief Technology Officer team in the Office of Science and Technology Policy, where she helped make bring greater value and transparency to healthcare by making data more accessible.





Administrator Hsiang holds a Bachelor’s and a Master’s degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She also holds an MBA from the Harvard Business School. She and her husband, Orin Hoffman, have one child.





###

			