More than 30 Harvard Kennedy School (HKS) students were selected by the Belfer Center for the coveted 2021-2022 Belfer Young Leader Student Fellowships. In that capacity, the student fellows take part in Center activities and work with faculty and research projects to enhance their leadership skills as well as insights and expertise in particular interest areas. In addition to working toward Master of Public Policy (MPP) degrees at Harvard Kennedy School, several are dual degree candidates.We asked student fellows who will graduate in the spring of 2022 to share with us their professional interests and goals for the future as well as their most memorable experiences at HKS, tips for others, or something most people don’t know about them. Meet some of our impressive upcoming grads!: I am most interested in national security and technology as well as U.S.-China relations. Next year, I will be clerking for a judge on the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals. After that, I am looking to work as a lawyer in the executive branch dealing with national security issues.: My trip to Taiwan and South Korea to study disinformation for the Belfer Center. I’ve spent much of my time at HKS and Belfer grappling with the social, economic, and political consequences of AI technologies, and I’m currently researching Chinese AI industrial policy with Professor Meg Rithmire.Justin DeShazor (second row, middle) moderates an event with former DNI James Clapper (second row, right). I intend to return to the U.S. Department of Defense after graduation, where I can continue to drive innovation for critical national security capabilities and help the United States retain a technological advantage over its adversaries. : A highlight of my HKS experience was moderating a Belfer event with Lt. Gen. Clapper, the former Director of National Intelligence and one of my role models for a life of public service. The Belfer Center draws together such an extraordinary set of people, and it has been a joy to engage with them during my time here! : At HKS, I am focused on international and global affairs, policies, and institutions and more specifically on issues related to U.S. foreign policies. My approach has been to balance my schedule with theoretical and practical courses; courses expanding on my strong interests and those introducing me to novel insights/opportunities. As part of my fellowship with Belfer, I am developing an original and exciting project that I have been passionate about with Belfer’s Executive Director, Natalie Colbert, to integrate African perspectives and programming into the center’s mission and planning. I am a Thomas R. Pickering Graduate Fellow with the U.S. State Department, and will be joining the diplomatic corps as a political diplomat upon graduation. Immediately after graduation, I will be working in the U.S. Consulate in Marseille on political and economic portfolios.  : My first time walking inside HKS last Spring, and my first in-person class this semester have been really emotional moments. Sitting in a classroom with over 90 people from all over the world, with diverse backgrounds, experiences, and interests, and all eager to learn and contribute to making the world a better place in different ways, was so empowering. My tip would be to define what you want your experiences at HKS to be (hopefully it includes making meaningful connections), bring it to life and achieve it, and embrace the unique journey.: I am interested in studying the intersection of emerging technology, racial equity, and economic mobility in the United States. Post-graduation, I plan to pursue roles in local, state, or federal government related to technology-based economic development. : It can be tempting to stay in your corner, but I’ve learned the most in spaces where I was surrounded by experts in a domain in which I had very little experience. Go out and explore: Belfer gave me the opportunity to dive deep into my interests in technology and national security, which included researching the future of quantum computing and supporting the Center’s election cybersecurity initiatives.  After graduation, I will continue exploring my these interests and other domains at , a new venture fund focused on supporting frontier technologies at the nexus of both business and national security. : Being part of the Belfer Center has truly been the most rewarding, enjoyable, and memorable component of my time at HKS. And as I prepare to leave Harvard, I can’t help but think back to the incredible and memorable moments at the Belfer Center—from traveling with a team of students for an election cybersecurity project to hearing the incredible insights about leadership and service from General Dunford and Secretary Carter.: At HKS, I have been focused on technology policy, and am working with the Belfer Cyber Project on their Data Privacy and Security Legislation Project. I’m also conducting my PAE research with the U.S. Department of State on countering disinformation and foreign influence in South African elections.Stefani Jones speaks with CISA Director Jen Easterly. After graduation I hope to work at the intersection of foreign policy and emerging technologies, particularly on issues related to mis/disinformation and cybersecurity. : Following my work with Belfer’s Defending Digital Democracy Project last year, I completed my summer internship with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency’s (CISA) Election Security Initiative. My most memorable moment was getting to ask CISA Director Jen Easterly about the future of the agency during her 2nd week on the job.: I am focused on environmental sustainability, and in particular on how the public and private sectors can work together to combat the climate threat. I will be joining NextEra Energy Transmission, helping to build much-needed energy transmission lines to prepare our grid for the clean energy future.: As an incoming student, I was worried about inconveniencing professors and administrators at the Belfer Center by setting up meetings with them or proposing initiatives. I’ve come to find that this is not only welcome, but encouraged. I urge new students to dive right in, pitch ideas, and ask for help to get great things done during the limited time here at HKS!: Product Innovation (using ) Nagela Nukuna at MIT. (Sarah Bastille) I hope to be in a role that lives in the nexus of tech and policy/politics. Whether that's in the private or public sector, I want to help advance the national conversations we’re having around domestic and global cultural issues (access to education, voting rights, climate change, mis/dis-information, labor re-entry, etc) through technological advances and innovative implementation.: One of the most important things I heard from a speaker at HKS was “you never know who you're sitting next to.” Learning doesn’t just happen in the classroom—but from your peers, mentors, and extracurricular activities. Jump right into the campus ecosystem, and get involved! Some of my biggest learnings have happened from Center events, research, etc!: During my time at HKS, I have focused on telecommunications law and policy, particularly promoting digital equity and consumer protections. After graduation, I will work as an associate at Harris, Wiltshire & Grannis, a telecommunications law firm in DC.: Most recently, I have had the pleasure of working with Jim Waldo in researching the implications of the COVID crisis on U.S. Internet networks’ resiliency. I have also researched policy options to regulate big tech companies with the Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) project.: Health security. Under the leadership of my mentor Dr. Syra Madad, I convened a working group of disaster medicine experts to develop a Hospital Surge and Preparedness Index. I’m currently interviewing for residency in the hopes of pursuing anesthesiology, where I look forward to acting as an arbiter of crisis both clinically and at the broader health policy level. : Growing up in New Jersey, I have somehow randomly run into each member of the Jersey Shore cast (except Snooki)!