
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Copyright notices
  

  
  
  
      
  A copyright notice is a concise note published by the Intellectual Property Office (IPO) providing basic copyright guidance.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Intellectual Property Office

      
      Published
      19 May 2014
      Last updated
      
        15 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Copyright notice service

        
        
          Prioritisation criteria

        
        
          Published notices

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Copyright notice service

The copyright notice service allows anyone to ask us to provide basic guidance on an area of copyright law where there is particular confusion or misunderstanding.

It is intended to provide an authoritative, impartial and reliable point of reference. It does not register copyright works.

Copyright is an automatic right and there are no official formalities to acquire copyright protection. There is no public or Government register of copyright in the UK.

General copyright enquiries can be sent to copyrightenquiries@ipo.gov.uk. Questions about other intellectual property rights like trade marks, designs or patents can be sent to information@ipo.gov.uk.

If you would like advice on a wider topic, the copyright notice service is aimed at those who do not have access to expert legal advice such as Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).

The copyright system can be inconsistent and confusing, particularly in relation to the application of new technologies, and this leads to imbalances of information between rights holders (such as publishers) and users (such as teachers and researchers).

By providing clear and reliable information on what is permissible under copyright law, the notices help schools and other educational institutions make better judgments about lawful uses of copyright works, for example.

To request a copyright notice, please complete the online form. The issue should be outlined as clearly as possible with relevant background.

While we prefer you submit requests using the online form, we will accept requests in writing to copyrightnotices@ipo.gov.uk or by post to:



Copyright Notices, Copyright and Enforcement Directorate
Intellectual Property Office
Concept House
Cardiff Road
Newport
South Wales
NP10 8QQ



There is no fee to submit a request.

We have discretion over when to respond to a request for a notice and it is unlikely that it will be able to provide a notice in response to every request.

We will periodically review notices to ensure they remain up to date both in terms of the law and developments in technology. Notices will be clearly marked with the date of issue or update.

Prioritisation criteria


  Can the question(s) raised be answered by general rather than specific guidance?
  Is there a demonstrable need for a copyright notice on the question(s) because of:a) the number of requests?b) the lack of existing guidance on the question(s) from the IPO or other body, eg other authoritative and impartial sources? and/orc) the introduction of new technology raising novel issues?
  Is a copyright notice likely to have a significant impact because it will provide clarity on:a) practical situations encountered by large numbers of right holders/users, eg teachers and students? and/orb) facilitating innovation or reducing actions which infringe copyright?



We issue copyright notices in response to requests or on our own initiative.

We have discretion whether to respond to a request for a notice.

Copyright notices are intended to set out general guidance; if the request is for guidance on a specific dispute or set of facts or will require evaluation of evidence, the requestor should seek his or her own legal advice.

In deciding what guidance to give through copyright notices, we will take into account:


  our available resources
  within that constraint, as many of the prioritisation criteria set out above as we consider relevant


The fact that one of the criteria or one example of the factors relevant to one of the criteria is met in any particular case does not necessarily mean a notice will be issued.

Prioritisation criteria will be kept under review and this information will be reissued with any revised criteria.

Published notices


  Digital images, photographs and the internet
  Assignment of copyright
  Performance of live music
  Knitting and sewing patterns
  Public exhibition of copyright works
  Printed music
  Duration of term






      
        
    Published 19 May 2014
    Last updated 15 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              15 January 2021
              Copyright notice: duration of term added.
            
            
              8 July 2020
              Copyright notices address and Copyright enquiries updated.
            
            
              22 September 2016
              Copyright notice: printed music (2/2016) added.
            
            
              24 March 2015
              Copyright notice 5/2015 (public exhibition of copyright works) added.
            
            
              2 February 2015
              New copyright notice 4/2015 added.
            
            
              12 January 2015
              Link to new copyright notice - Performance of live music added.
            
            
              12 November 2014
              Copyright notice: assingment of copyright added.
            
            
              19 May 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Copyright notice: assignment of copyright
        Copyright notice: digital images, photographs and the internet
        Copyright notice: printed music
        Copyright notice: public exhibition of copyright works
        Copyright notice: performance of live music

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Copyright

  


  

  


    
  


    