Vice Chief of Space Operations Gen. David D. Thompson (8:05 a.m. EDT); Marine Corps Lt. Gen. Dennis Crall, Joint Staff director, command, control, communications and computers/cyber; and chief information officer, J6 (8:33 a.m. EDT); Space Development Agency Director Dr. Derek Tournear (9:38 a.m. EDT); and Director of Naval Intelligence Vice Adm. Jeffrey Trussler (1:48 p.m. EDT) speak at the virtual C4ISRNET Conference 2021. Register at .Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs for Russia, Ukraine, Eurasia Laura K. Cooper speaks at a 9 a.m. EDT U.S.-Adriatic Charter (A5) virtual conference hosted by Croatia on "Women's Contribution to Peace and Security: Lessons Learned and Challenges Ahead." Media can register for the conference at this email address: .Acting Department of Defense Chief Information Officer John Sherman; Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civilian Personnel Policy Veronica Hinton; Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Leonard Litton; and Marine Corps Lt. Gen. Dennis Crall, Joint Staff director, command, control, communications and computers/cyber; and chief information officer, J6, provide testimony at 2:30 p.m. EDT at a Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Personnel hearing on the future cyber workforce of DOD and the military services, Room SR-232A, Russell Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C. The hearing will also be .Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Deputy Director Dr. Peter Highnam; Chief of Naval Research Rear Adm. Lorin Selby; Army Maj. Gen. John George, commanding general, U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command; and Air Force Brig. Gen. Heather Pringle, commander, Air Force Research Laboratory, provide testimony at 2:30 p.m. EDT at a Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities hearing on science and technology, technology maturation, and technology transition activities, Room SR-222 Russell Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C. The hearing will also be .Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs Dr. Terry Adirim and Army Lt. Gen. Ronald J. Place, director, Defense Health Agency, provide a COVID-19 update to the media in the Pentagon Briefing Room (2D972) at 3 p.m. EDT. The briefing will be  and broadcast on Channel 2 in the Pentagon.Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans and Capabilities Melissa Dalton; Navy Adm. Charles Richard, commander, U.S. Strategic Command; and Army Gen. James Dickinson, commander, U.S. Space Command, provide testimony at 4 p.m. EDT at a House Armed Services Strategic Forces Subcommittee posture hearing, 2118 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, D.C. The hearing will also be  and broadcast on Channel 2 in the Pentagon.