
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Develop your data and APIs using a reference architecture
  

  
  
  
      
  Use a reference architecture to develop a public sector organisation’s technology and how it shares data across government.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      22 March 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Plan your architecture using a maturity model

        
        
          Build an architecture that promotes data exchange across government

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guidance is a reference architecture. It will help you build your IT infrastructure so it supports operational and analytical processes that focus on using data and APIs. It suggests best practices and a maturity model.

Developing your government organisation’s technical estate can help you to:


  reduce your IT spend by increasing functionality, reusability and availability of your technology
  reduce government technology lock-in by increasing your organisation’s interoperability with other government technology
  reduce the time and money you spend on Freedom of Information requests by proactively publishing data
  promote technical innovation across government services by using new technologies
  improve the way you communicate across government, by making it easier to share data between organisations
  standardise your technology, by helping you understand how different technical and data standards fit together
  encourage you to adopt existing open standards, and engage with the standards’ development
  move away from document-based processes and systems to those based on standardised data, as suggested by the National Data Strategy

  encourage cultural change in your organisation by building services that are interoperable with others both inside and outside government
  respond to feedback from users and resolve identified problems


By following this reference architecture, your services will meet the main requirements of the Service Standard and the spend controls process. This does not replace the spend controls process, or the need to go through a service assessment.

Plan your architecture using a maturity model

You will need to assess the maturity of your reference architecture. At a minimum, the architecture you build should:


  offer a service which can scale with demand using cloud technology

  provide access through a common authentication standard, such as OAuth

  produce data using the Open Standards Principles

  give users access to data using a documented API
  use OpenAPI 3 to document REST APIs
  let external users access the system where appropriate


This model is one way of assessing and developing the maturity of your architecture:


  
    
      
      Documenting existing systems
      API
      OAuth
      Open standards
      Data
    
  
  
    
      Maturity level 1
      Your systems are not all documented
      Most of your systems do not support APIs
      The OAuth security protocol is available for users in your organisation
      Some of your systems use open standards
      Your organisation data is mostly entered manually
    
    
      Maturity level 2
      Your systems are all documented
      The majority of your systems support APIs
      OAuth is available for cross- government users
      All of your systems use open standards
      Data is only entered manually to collect information that cannot be collected any other way
    
    
      Maturity level 3
      Your documentation is automated and self-updating
      Your APIs are published to API catalogue You have OpenAPI documentation
      OAuth is available for users outside government, as well as all users inside government
      You work with standards development organisations to define standards
      Your organisation produces high quality reference data for other systems
    
  


Build an architecture that promotes data exchange across government

Government organisations use different systems for different needs, for example HR, communications or statistical systems. Sometimes these can be unique to an organisation.

You should aim to build an architecture that makes it easier to exchange data with other government organisations. You can do this by making sure your:


  system can exchange data with other systems by being as interoperable as possible
  system produces data in an open standard format

  system has an API
  API is documented according to the OpenAPI specification

  API uses a common authentication protocol

  systems documentation is up to date and clearly shows how they connect to other systems


You should also make sure:


  users outside of government are able to access your data, where appropriate, using an appropriately authenticated API

  external organisations can reuse software you create
  data you use is gathered from core data sets and does not replicate core data



Reuse applications and common data

When building your architecture, you should look for existing software and services which fit your needs, and reuse them. This includes those developed by other organisations.

Your organisation should decide whether to buy or build, but you must follow the GDS spend controls process. You should make as much of your data as interoperable as possible by following point 9 of the Technology Code of Practice.

Where possible, you should make use of shared platforms such as GOV.UK PaaS, which can host your service in the government cloud. You can also use existing government platforms that carry out specific services. For example, instead of building a new payment system, you should use GOV.UK Pay.

If a cross-government solution does not yet exist, you should consult with other teams to see if they have solved a similar issue and work together on developing a common solution.

You should design and develop technology with the expectation that it could become part of Government as a Platform in the future. This means following GDS Service Manual guidelines on operating a reliable and scalable platform.

Technology development should happen in the open. Where appropriate, all your code should be open source, and licenced for other people to reuse. You should understand the intellectual property (IP) rights if you’re using technology developed by a third party.

You should reuse existing datasets whenever possible. You should be careful not to rebuild datasets that already exist.

All data should use approved open data standards and include metadata to allow other people to reuse it.

Follow a services and systems model based on data

You should aim for an approach to services and systems in your organisation based around data, and move towards an approach based on standardised data.

A “service” is the method by which users interact with the government, for example Renew your driving licence. It is a group of multiple, interoperable systems that ingests, stores, manipulates, and produces data.

A “system” is one of the components which makes up a service. For example, the database storing the information, the sign in system, or an analytics platform.

Your organisation should follow a model which transforms unstructured data into structured data as soon as possible when the data arrives.

This model should create a record of all events and transactions relating to that data, then store both the data and its record in a database. This allows for more consistent data that is easy to manipulate and retrieve. It also helps to make sure that data is accessible and reusable.

When your data is requested by other people, it must be provided as structured data through an API. Read guidance about designing, building and running APIs to best suit your organisation’s needs.

Your data-based model can transform this into unstructured data, for example customer data being turned into a postable paper document.

Read guidance on choosing tools and infrastructure to make better use of data to help you choose software and standards to suit your organisation.




      
        
    Published 22 March 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Manage your data for access and reuse
        Metadata standards for sharing and publishing data
        Open Source guidance
        Make privacy integral
        Choose tools and infrastructure to make better use of your data

  




      

    Collection

  


        Metadata standards for sharing and publishing data

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    