
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    End-point assessment organisation guide to delivering high-quality assessment of apprenticeships
  

  
  

  
    
  A best practice guide for apprenticeship end-point assessment organisations and for those considering offering apprenticeship assessment in the future.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      29 July 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Prepare to offer apprenticeship end-point assessment
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Starting to deliver apprenticeship end-point assessment
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Ongoing apprenticeship delivery as an end-point assessment organisation
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Preparing for gateway and completing end-point assessment as an end-point assessment organisation
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Results, feedback and celebration after end-point assessment
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Apprenticeships should meet the skills needs of apprentices and the needs of employers of all sizes.

Every apprentice should have a high-quality experience that prepares them for a successful career and supports their progression to higher level skills.

In England, every apprentice on an apprenticeship standard must successfully undertake an independent assessment at the end of their training to confirm they have achieved occupational competence. If they do not pass the assessment, they have not completed their apprenticeship. This is known as an end-point assessment (EPA).

End-point assessment is an independent assessment of the knowledge, skills and behaviours which have been learnt throughout the apprenticeship and tests the apprentice’s ability to apply them in the workplace.

Assessments need to be conducted by approved independent end-point assessment organisations (EPAOs).

Awareness of and preparation for assessment is part of the whole apprenticeship journey and should be introduced right at the start of the programme. This will help to ensure an apprentice gets the best out of their apprenticeship and successfully completes their training.

This best practice guide is intended for both new and existing EPAOs and organisations planning to become an EPAO in the future. It outlines the roles and responsibilities of EPAOs with regard to assessment throughout the whole apprenticeship journey.



        
      

      
    Published 29 July 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Apprentice guide to assessment
        Support your apprentice through end-point assessment
        ESFA financial health assessment
        What you need to know before applying to be an apprentice end-point assessment organisation

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Apprenticeships, traineeships and internships

  


  

  


    
  


    