The US market for retirement recordkeeping is facing strengthened headwinds attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic, which most significantly has shaken lives and livelihoods around the globe, also has accelerated the challenges already facing recordkeepers. Building on principles of , which we discussed in 2019 from the perspective of defined-contribution (DC) recordkeeping, the players in this market need to reflect on factors shaping the market, their long-term market position, and the need to pivot their business model to achieve profitable growth.COVID-19’s long-term impacts on the US retirement sector remain uncertain. However, when we look at the months ahead, three implications are coming into focus: a modest reduction in net flows, changes to participant engagement, and shifting investor appetite for fixed-income products.Despite broader market uncertainty, flows have been resilient. However, existing gaps in access and usage by lower-income employees and employees at smaller businesses widened in 2020.Participant engagement also has increased, with expected near-term surges during periods of market volatility and longer-term, steadier demand reported for holistic wealth advice.In reaction to the significant market volatility in the first three quarters of 2020, investors shifted toward bond and stable-value products, moving away from traditional large-cap equities and target-date funds. In fact, according to Alight Solutions, allocations to fixed-income products—bonds, stable-value, and money market funds—dominated trading for the majority of 2020 (at 74 percent of days in the third quarter, for example). Stable-value accounts were particularly popular, ranking behind only bond funds.This shift raises two questions:While these near-term impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on US retirement funds are modest if taken separately, together they will put further pressure on the challenged profitability of recordkeepers. Lower flows reduce revenues tied to plans’ asset balances. Increased participant demand for guidance boosts operational expenses for firms with weak interactive voice-recognition capabilities or digital and self-serve channels. And any flows into stable-value funds (traditionally offered by insurance carriers to retirement participants) are offset by low interest rates and lower profitability for these proprietary funds. Recordkeepers should use this opportunity to reconsider their long-term position in the record-keeping market. For firms that have not done so already, now is the time to explore branching out into adjacent revenue streams—for example, by offering HR-adjacent services or acquiring another firm to achieve greater economies of scale. More challenged firms may need to rethink their role in recordkeeping and look to exit, particularly in light of the robust valuations in the market.Recordkeepers that decide to persist and grow should consider the following steps:It appears likely that, as we described in our 2019 article, record keeping will continue to consolidate, squeezing out or rolling up marginal firms, which will leave the remaining competitors with greater scale and profitability and the ability to invest in improved participant and sponsor experiences. In fact, this scenario may take shape more quickly than we had expected.Successful firms will offer sponsors a unique value proposition and take a “lifetime value” view of sponsor and participant relationships. They’ll make tough but thoughtful decisions about where they fit best in the value chain and where they can partner. Further, as recordkeepers outsource portions of their operations to manage near-term cost pressures, middle- and back-office utilities will accelerate their consolidation of the recordkeeping profit pool.Finally, most recordkeepers will need to choose between being an acquirer or being acquired. If the former, they must . Ultimately, the winners in DC recordkeeping will be the firms that reduce the costs of record-keeping basics through technology and scale and that innovate and broaden the value they offer plan participants and sponsors.To download a PDF version of this article, . Sarah Holden, Daniel Schrass, and Elena Barone Chism, , Investment Company Institute, August 2020, ici.org. Sarah Holden, Daniel Schrass, and Elena Barone Chism, , Investment Ccompany Institute, August 2020, ici.org. , Fidelity, August 2020, fidelity.com. Anne Tergesen, “Many companies turn 401(k) retirement contributions back on,” , December 3, 2020wsj.com. Alight Solutions 401(k) Index™: Third quarter 2020 observations,” Alight, alight.com. Alight Solutions 401(k) Index™: Third quarter 2020 observations,” Alight, alight.com.