
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Future RAN: Diversifying the 5G Supply Chain
  

  
  
  
      
  Future RAN is an open competition, run by DCMS, that will allocate up to £30 million of R&D funding to projects that support the goals of the government's 5G Supply Chain Diversification Strategy. The competition is aimed at helping to incentivise industry to create new products and services to unlock the full potential of Open RAN. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      2 July 2021
      Last updated
      
        26 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Background

        
        
          Objectives

        
        
          Competition timeline and events

        
        
          Who can apply?

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Funding

        
        
          Required documents

        
        
          Supporting documents

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

What is Future RAN: Diversifying the 5G Supply Chain?

Future RAN is an open competition, run by DCMS, that will allocate up to £30 million of R&D funding to projects that support the goals of the Government’s 5G Supply Chain Diversification Strategy. The competition is aimed at helping to incentivise industry to create new products and services to unlock the full potential of Open RAN.

Defining Open RAN

When referring to Open RAN, we mean this in its broader sense of disaggregated networks and open architectures. It is worth noting that we are also looking to support other forms of interoperability in the RAN, with a view to enabling multi-vendor architectures by default. Bidders should not feel discouraged from applying if their solution does not meet the specific definition of the Open RAN set of standards.

Background

The Diversification Strategy identified R&D as a barrier to entry for new suppliers. The Government is investing in the UK’s R&D ecosystem and capability in order to underpin the long-term success of the reforms and initiatives set out in the Diversification Strategy. This competition will support the UK’s infrastructure innovation ecosystem to play a leading role transforming the UK telecoms market, and encourage more private sector innovation to help unlock opportunities for UK businesses to play a role in the emerging global supply chain based on open standards.

This competition is part of a wide-ranging government response to the challenge of diversifying the UK’s supply market for radio equipment set out in the Diversification Strategy. The Diversification Strategy calls for the establishment of a UK wide R&D ecosystem spanning a range of areas including: the development of physical hardware; software/virtualised solutions; testing with live networks; and accelerating and pulling forward the development of interoperable technologies. There is already an ecosystem taking shape through private sector funding. However, this competition will help to harness that momentum and promote collaboration and convene the strengths of the UK’s R&D sectors to pull in the same direction and towards the goals of the diverse supply chain the UK needs to ensure its national security and resilience. Ultimately, the projects funded through this competition should help develop products that resolve the top challenges posed by new, interoperable technologies, and develop initial UK capability in the Open RAN ecosystem.

The government is already making investments to bolster this ecosystem in the form of the SmartRAN Open Network Interoperability Centre (SONIC) and the UK Telecoms Lab (UKTL). This competition will complement those initiatives by focusing more on providing support to companies developing technology rather than testbed infrastructure. Consortia are encouraged to make use of existing testbeds and other infrastructure, such as SONIC, other 5GTT funded facilities, and private sector labs and testbed infrastructure.

Objectives


  Accelerate the development of high-performance 5G Open RAN solutions that meet UK dense urban requirements by 2025.
  Attract new 5G RAN suppliers to conduct R&D in the UK, and foster professional collaborations between potential new entrants into the UK’s public network.
  Contribute to the delivery of the 5G Supply Chain Diversification Strategy’s objectives of disaggregated supply chains, open interfaces by default, and security being a priority in network deployment.


Competition timeline and events

There will be opportunities to learn more about the competition and discuss with potential partners at a series of direct engagement events run by UK5G in collaboration with DCMS:


  
    
      Briefing Events
      Date
    
  
  
    
      Launch Event
      13 July 2021
    
    
      Matchmaking Event
      27 July 2021
    
  


For this competition the application window is open for 8 weeks and the expected timeline is:


  
    
      Milestones
      Date
    
  
  
    
      Competition launch
      2 July 2021
    
    
      Applications deadline
      27 August 2021
    
    
      Shortlisted applicants notified
      Mid-September 2021
    
    
      Interviews with shortlisted applicants
      Late September 2021
    
    
      Successful applicants notified
      Mid-October 2021
    
    
      Project pre-grant set up and DCMS due diligence. Subject to completion, DCMS and the lead partner then sign a grant funding agreement.
      November 2021 - January 2022
    
  


Who can apply?

This competition is open to applications from consortia with two or more members with funding available for activity taking place in the UK.

How to apply

Please read the Competition Guidance below, complete the Application Form and the Finance Forms provided and return to 5g-diversification-strategy@dcms.gov.uk by midday on the 27th August.

Funding

There is up to £30 million of funding available from the Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport in this competition. Grants ranging from £250,000 to £5 million will be made available to individual projects lasting up to 18 months.

Required documents


  
      
  
  
    Application form 
    
        MS Word Document, 44.4KB
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Project finance form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 304KB
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: participation agreement
    
        MS Word Document, 117KB
    


  


Supporting documents


  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: application guidance
    
        PDF, 314KB, 26 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: Draft grant funding agreement 
    
        MS Word Document, 207KB
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: General guidance for grant applications
    
        PDF, 188KB, 9 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: Eligible project costs guidance
    
        PDF, 126KB, 7 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: Guidance for academics applying via the Je-S system
    
        PDF, 431KB, 3 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition: Potential monitoring indicators
    
        PDF, 140KB, 4 pages
    


  



  
      
  
  
    Future RAN Competition - Q&A log
    
        ODS, 78KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  


Contact us

If you have any questions or would like more clarification, please contact us on 5g-diversification-strategy@dcms.gov.uk. Your question and respective answer will be aggregated, anonymised and added to a public Q&A document unless commercially sensitive.





      
        
    Published 2 July 2021
    Last updated 26 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 August 2021
              Updated Future RAN Competition - Q&A log.
            
            
              17 August 2021
              Updated Q&A log.
            
            
              2 August 2021
              Page update. Added Q&A.
            
            
              2 July 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        5G Testbeds and Trials Programme
        UK G7 Presidency Statement: Digital and Tech
        Future Tech Forum - Chairs Statement London
        Future Tech Forum - Opening Keynote
        Telecoms Diversification Taskforce: findings and report

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Communications and telecomms

  


  

  


    
  


    