Cambridge, MA – The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard Kennedy School is pleased to announce its second cohort of . This year’s cohort comprises seven practitioners from across private and public sectors, including biotechnology, education, public policy, and more. The fellows will spend 10 months in-residence at Harvard University engaging with a range of experts to provide independent and rigorous analysis on some of today’s most pressing challenges regarding technology and society.This past year has highlighted the outstanding local and global challenges we face as a society on issues of race, bioethics, accessibility, and democracy. TAPP is proud to welcome our new cohort of fellows—a phenomenal group of experts who will work toward action-oriented solutions to many timely challenges at the intersection of tech and public purpose.Leisel Bogan is the Director of the Congressional Digital Service Fellowship for TechCongress. Prior to her current role she served as the Senior Fellow for Cybersecurity, Technology and National Security in the office of Senator Mark Warner.Stephen Larrick, head of city success at urban-tech startup Stae, is an urbanist and open gov advocate who has worked at the intersection of community planning, municipal governance, and data & technology for over a decade.Francella Ochillo is Executive Director of Next Century Cities, a nonprofit that focuses on expanding high-speed broadband connectivity across the U.S. She is an attorney and digital rights advocate whose work underscores how widespread broadband adoption can improve educational outcomes, economic mobility, the ability to age in place, and pathways for participating in our democracy.Aviv Ovadya is a technologist working to ensure that our mediums of communication can facilitate a “good society”—that they not only support our everyday lives, but also promote the collective trust and intelligence necessary for taking on existential global challenges.Afsaneh Rigot covers issues of law, technology, LGBTQ, refugee, and human rights. She is a senior researcher at ARTICLE 19 focusing on the Middle East and North African (MENA) human rights issues and international corporate responsibility. Livio Valenti is a sustainability entrepreneur leveraging scientific discoveries to build innovative companies in the healthcare, biotechnology and material science field. He is the co-founder of Vaxess Technologies, a biotechnology company developing a new class of vaccines that can be delivered with a silk-based skin patch.The Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) Project works to ensure that emerging technologies are developed and managed in ways that serve the overall public good. Learn more about the project .  Karen Ejiofor
Program Coordinator 
Technology and Public Purpose (TAPP) Project  To stay up-to-date on the latest TAPP projects, events, and news, including updates on the TAPP Fellowship program, follow us on  or visit our . 