

This report provides an examination of three possible modalities for generating human performance enhancement (HPE): genetic modifications, artificial intelligence, and Internet of Bodies approaches in which devices implanted in or worn by a human are connected to a network. This report provides an overview of the potential for each modality, the state of the enabling technologies, and the associated challenges (both technical and ethical).




Read Online

Technological Approaches to Human Performance Enhancement
by Marjory S. Blumenthal, Alison K. Hottes, Christy Foran, Mary Lee
Related Topics: Biomedical Research, Emerging Technologies, Genomic Medicine, Health Information Technology
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






DownloadDownload eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


1.6 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.




Purchase
Purchase Print Copy

 FormatList Price
Price


Add to Cart
Paperback110 pages
$23.00
$18.40 20% Web Discount










Research Questions

What are some approaches to HPE?What technical aspects of HPE might be relevant for military and intelligence operations?



Human performance enhancement (HPE) will have implications for military and intelligence operations. A variety of HPE could be of potential military and intelligence operational value. Some examples are increased strength, speed, endurance, and intelligence; others are reduced sleep needs and reaction times. This report provides an examination of three possible modalities for generating HPE: (1) genetic modifications, (2) artificial intelligence (AI), and (3) Internet of Bodies (IoB) approaches in which devices implanted in or worn by a human are connected to a network. For each modality, this report provides an overview of its potential for HPE, the state of the enabling technologies, and the associated challenges (both technical and ethical). The report also features a discussion of the countries where the capabilities or the associated foundational research are being most actively pursued.
Each of these HPE realms relies at some point on digital signals. In addition to any HPE, per se, the emission, storage, and manipulation of this digital information might pose risks and opportunities for military and intelligence operations. Some of the technologies discussed are embryonic, but the pace of development is difficult to predict, and this report provides a snapshot in time of the state of the technology domain.
Key Findings

The three technology categories considered in this report have the potential to be used to enhance human performance, but at different points in timeA much-hyped area is gene manipulation, which is the most nascent—research focuses on the potential to alleviate disease, and decades of research will be required before meaningful application to HPE should be expected. That said, some forms of genetic analysis can be helpful in understanding capabilities of people as they are today.
AI also has long been associated with hype, and although related technologies are steadily improving, meaningful impacts on cognitive and other prostheses are expected to take five to ten years. These new prostheses will provide new channels of communication, along with associated vulnerabilities.
The IoB is already having an effect today; it will become more complex and capable over time. It is becoming both a source of signals and a target for cyberattacks.


Recommendations

Understanding when and where breakthroughs or setbacks have occurred—and when and where novel and even surprising applications have emerged—will require monitoring.
Relevant program launches or terminations, awards of government grants or contracts, joint ventures and acquisitions, conferences and trade shows, patents, and publications are among the indicators to watch.
It will also be important to monitor the kinds of data that are intentionally and unintentionally collected, used, or emitted by HPE-related systems. The benefits of emerging forms of communications will be offset by new kinds of cyber vulnerabilities.



Table of Contents

Chapter One
Human Performance Enhancement: A Multimodal Process

Chapter Two
Potential for Using Genetic Modifications to Increase Human Performance

Chapter Three
Human Performance Enhancement and Artificial Intelligence

Chapter Four
The Internet of Bodies

Chapter Five
Conclusion




Research conducted by

RAND National Security Research Division



This research was sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense and conducted within the Cyber and Intelligence Policy Center of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD).This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Available

Print
Format: Paperback
Paperback Pages: 110
List Price: $23.00
Paperback Price:  $18.40
Paperback ISBN/EAN: 1-9774-0804-4
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA1482-2
Document Number: RR-A1482-2
Year: 2021
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Biomedical ResearchEmerging TechnologiesGenomic MedicineHealth Information Technology

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Blumenthal, Marjory S., Alison K. Hottes, Christy Foran, and Mary Lee, Technological Approaches to Human Performance Enhancement. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1482-2.html. Also available in print form.
Blumenthal, Marjory S., Alison K. Hottes, Christy Foran, and Mary Lee, Technological Approaches to Human Performance Enhancement, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A1482-2, 2021. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1482-2.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



