
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Waste quality protocols review
  

  
  

  
    
  Environment Agency’s progress on revising the waste quality protocols.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Environment Agency

      
      Published
      15 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        1 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Waste quality protocols review
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Progress on the Environment Agency’s review of the 13 waste quality protocols.



        
      

      
    Published 15 December 2020
    Last updated 1 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 December 2021
              Updated aggregates from inert wastes: the task and finish group is set up and the revision process has started. Added tyre-derived rubber material to the list of completed quality protocol reviews. Added pulverised fuel ash and furnace bottom ash to the list of ongoing quality protocol reviews (review starting in December 2021).
            
            
              7 October 2021
              Added a section on the QP review for processed fuel oil. Removed the dates for reviews that have not yet started. Updated the 'Contact us' section to clarify that you should only apply to be part of a task and finish group when a QP needs to be revised.
            
            
              13 July 2021
              We have updated the progress made on the quality protocols.
            
            
              15 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Quality protocol: aggregates from inert waste
        Quality protocol: pulverised fuel ash (PFA) and furnace bottom ash (FBA)
        Quality protocols: converting waste into non-waste products
        Quality protocol: flat glass
        Quality protocol: poultry litter ash (PLA)

  




      

    Collection

  


        Quality protocols: converting waste into non-waste products

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Waste and environmental impact
        Waste management
        Business and the environment

  


  

  


    
  


    