
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Lindholme Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Lindholme is an adult male prison, near Doncaster, South Yorkshire.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      19 May 2020
      Last updated
      
        28 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Lindholme

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Lindholme

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Lindholme

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Lindholme

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2 minute survey.


Book and plan your visit to Lindholme


Lindholme prison is is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 1 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


To visit someone in Lindholme you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


At least one visitor must be 18 or older at every visit.

There may be a limit to the number of visits a person can have. You can check this with Lindholme.

Contact Lindholme if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Lindholme
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits
Lindholme is currently operating a limited visits schedule for family and friends. You can book your visit by telephone. There is no online booking service available.

Booking line: 01302 524 980

The booking line is open: Monday to Friday, 9am to 11am and 1:30pm to 3:30pm

Visiting times:


  Monday. Wednesday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday: 2:15pm to 3:15pm


How to book legal and professional visits
There are currently no legal visits taking place.

You can book a legal phone call by email.
legal.visits.lindholme@justice.co.uk

Getting to Lindholme
Find Lindholme on a map

The closest railway station is Doncaster and you can get a bus or taxi from there.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



There is a visitor car park at the end of Vulcan Way.

Entering Lindholme
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors will need to be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Lindholme has a strict dress code policy, which means visitors should wear smart clothes (no vests, no low-cut tops, no shorts, no short dresses and no headwear, other than that worn for religious reasons).

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Lindholme. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker or with security. This includes pushchairs and car seats.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
The Prison Advice and Care Trust runs a visitors centre where you can get support and information.

Telephone: 01302 524 700
Find out about call charges

Family days
Family days are not currently available.

Keep in touch with someone at Lindholme
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Lindholme.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Phone calls
Prisoners do not have phones in their rooms so they will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Email
You can send emails to someone in Lindholme using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies, depending on the rules at Lindholme.

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Lindholme.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts
You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
People in Lindholme are given a list of approved items that can be sent to them as gifts. Contact Lindholme for more information on what’s allowed.

Family and friends of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.
 
For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Make sure to include the person’s name and prisoner number on the parcel.

All parcels will be opened and checked by officers.

Life at Lindholme
Lindholme is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men can learn new skills to help them on release.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Lindholme has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by the Doncaster Safeguarding Adults Board.

Arrival and first night
When a prisoner first arrives at Lindholme, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs.

Induction
Each person who arrives at Lindholme gets an induction that lasts about a week. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
There are over 1000 men at Lindholme, housed in 10 units with a mixture of single and double rooms. There is also a purpose-built segregation unit.

Education and work
Lindholme provides individual learning plans for all men. Their education, training, advice and support focus on preparing the men to get good jobs when they leave.

Learning and skills programmes include literacy, numeracy, GCSE English, maths and ESOL (English for speakers of other languages).

Men can learn basic information technology (IT) or get higher qualifications in building computers, business admin and start-up, media and graphic design. There are courses in printing, engineering, fork lift driving, plumbing, carpentry, textiles, catering, barbering, cleaning, plastering, painting and decorating and hospitality.
Men can also take a range of gym qualifications.

Lindholme also offers life skills courses in family learning and drug and alcohol awareness.

Organisations Lindholme works with
For men with issues around substance misuse, the CARAT team offers one-to-one support. 
On release, they have a drugs intervention programme worker to continue the support.

Shelter helps men with accommodation when preparing to leave prison.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Problems and complaints

If you have a problem contact Lindholme. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Lindholme in response to independent inspections.

Contact Lindholme
Governor: Simon Walters

Telephone (24 hours): 01302 524 700
Fax: 01302 524 750
Find out about call charges

Follow Lindholme on Twitter

Address


HMP Lindholme
Bawtry Road
Hatfield
Doncaster
DN7 6EE



See map

Safer custody hotline
If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a man in Lindholme, call the safer custody hotline.

Telephone: 01302 524 731

You may be asked to leave a message. 
If so, include your name, telephone number and why you’re calling, as well as the name and prisoner number of the man you’re worried about. 
Somebody should call you back within 24 hours.

In an emergency, call the switchboard.


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2 minute survey.





      
        
    Published 19 May 2020
    Last updated 28 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              28 July 2021
              Added link to information about testing for physical contact at visits.
            
            
              21 May 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              30 April 2021
              Prison moved into National Stage 3 framework and is now preparing to open visits for family, friends and significant others. We will update this page with specific visiting information as soon as possible.
            
            
              21 December 2020
              visit info
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visit info
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visit info
            
            
              23 October 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              7 September 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              5 August 2020
              Updated: HMP Lindholme visiting times and visiting procedure changes during coronavirus.
            
            
              19 May 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Gartree Prison
        Hollesley Bay Prison
        Huntercombe Prison
        Warren Hill Prison
        Ford Prison

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    