

Policy Analysis for Complex Systems (PACS) Speaker Series
As part of its work on strategy and long-term planning under conditions of deep uncertainty, the Pardee Center is inviting experts in understanding, managing, and shaping complex adaptive systems (CAS) to participate in the Policy Analysis for Complex Systems (PACS) Speaker Series. This internal speaker series and related discussions are part of an ongoing initiative at RAND to identify key issues for the future practice of policy and systems analysis.

Previous Visiting Speakers
Building Organizations Embedded in Complex Systems: Reimagining Health Systems and Medical Education
September 14, 2021
Pedro “Joe” Greer, Jr.
Professor and Founding Dean, Roseman University College of Medicine
Speaker Bio

Pedro “Joe” Greer is a physician and dean of the Roseman University College of Medicine, a new Las Vegas-based medical school reimagining medical education. Before joining Roseman, Dr. Greer developed a unique and pioneering educational program at Florida International University (FIU) to train medical students in addressing social determinants of health. He has received both the Presidential Medal of Freedom (2009) and the MacArthur “Genius” Fellowship (1993).
Integrative Pluralism: A Discussion on Science, Complexity and Policy
May 26, 2021
Sandra Mitchell
Distinguished Professor, Department of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Pittsburgh
Speaker Bio

Sandra D. Mitchell is an American philosopher of science and historian of ideas. She holds the position of distinguished professor in the department of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of Pittsburgh. Her research focuses on the philosophy of biology and the philosophy of social science, and connections between the two. She is the author of Unsimple Truths, Science, Complexity and Policy (University of Chicago Press, 2009).
Complexity Economics
February 26, 2021
Brian Arthur
External Professor, Santa Fe Institute; and Visiting Researcher, System Sciences Lab, PARC
Speaker Bio

Brian Arthur is an economist credited with contributing to the development of the modern approach to increasing returns. He is an authority on economics in relation to complexity theory, technology and financial markets. He is a member of the Founders Society of the Santa Fe Institute and in 1988 ran its first research program. 
Dynamics of American Business Firms from a Complex Systems Perspective: Data, Theories, and Agent-Based Models
December 14, 2020
Robert Axtell
Professor, Computational Science, George Mason University
Speaker Bio

Rob Axtell is Professor at George Mason University where he advises Ph.D. students in Mason’s novel Computational Social Science Ph.D. degree program. He works at the intersection of economics and computer science while also working on policy problems from a computational perspective. His book with J. Epstein, “Growing Artificial Societies” (MIT Press) is an early statement of the use of agent-based modeling in the social sciences. His research has been published in “Science” and other general interest journals, in leading field journals (e.g., “American Economic Review,” “Economic Journal”), and in computer science conference proceedings (e.g., “Autonomous Agent and Multi-Agent Systems”). He is an external faculty member at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) and Northwestern University’s Institute on Complex Systems (NICO). He earned a Ph.D. from Carnegie Mellon University.
Many Models Approach to Complex Adaptive System Change
July 23, 2020
Scott Page
John Seely Brown Distinguished University Professor of Complexity, Social Science, and Management at the University of Michigan
Speaker Bio

Scott Page is the John Seely Brown Distinguished University Professor of Complexity, Social Science, and Management at the University of Michigan, and an elected member (2011) of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Scott’s work covers disciplines including economics, political science, computer science, management, physics, public health, geography, urban planning, engineering, and history. He has written five books including The Model Thinker: What you need to know to make data work for you; Complex Adaptive Social Systems (with John Miller); and, most recently, Diversity and Complexity, which explores the contributions of diversity within complex systems.



