
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Historical spoil tip sites in Wales
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Cymraeg
        
    
  

  

  
      
  The Coal Authority is undertaking an emergency review of all spoil tips in Wales. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Coal Authority and Office of the Secretary of State for Wales

      
      Published
      23 March 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Spoil tips, sometimes referred to as coal tips or spoil heaps, vary in age and size, and are mainly composed of stone and other discarded material from historical mining operations.

Most disused spoil tips throughout Britain are now in either local authority or private ownership.

The Coal Authority has a management programme which ensures its spoil tips are inspected at least twice a year.

Local authorities have different inspection and management programmes for the spoil tips they own.

Regular inspection and maintenance is crucial when managing historical spoil tip sites.

Effective drainage infrastructure is also vital to move water away from the tip material, as water ingress poses the biggest risk to stability.

Many tips have formal and informal drainage channels which need to be kept clear of debris and vegetation to ensure the efficient flow of water, especially during heavy rainfall.

Some spoil tip sites have a weather station and monitoring boreholes, with higher risk sites having movement sensors that can be remotely monitored. If sufficient movement is detected this will automatically trigger a remote alarm system.

This urgent safety review being undertaken will produce a standardised approach to the future inspection and maintenance of all spoil tip sites in Wales.

As part of this review, historical spoil tips will be categorised according to risk.

Each site will be given a rating in 2 parts, classifying the inherent risk from A to D, with C and D classified as ‘the sites with more risks’.

A further numbered 1 to 3 sub-category, based on the tip location and any risk to people, property or critical infrastructure, is also being applied in the following way:


  is a risk to people or critical infrastructure
  has a risk impact on the environment, such as rivers or other infrastructure
  is classed as a remote area


We will be using drones, along with other technology, to help survey some of the larger sites and to assist with this rapid assessment of these structures to keep people and property safe.

If you want any further information or safety advice about historical coal tip sites in Wales contact the:


    Coal tip safety team

    
      Coal Authority200 Lichfield LaneMansfieldNottinghamshireNG18 4RG
    

    
        
          Email tips@coal.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 0800 021 9230
        
    

    This team holds information and can offer safety advice about historical coal tip sites in Wales.Monday to Thursday: 8:45am to 5pmFriday: 8:45am to 4:30pmYou can call us 24/7 to report a coal mining hazard or to get safety advice on 0800 288 4242.






      
        
    Published 23 March 2020



          
      

  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Coal

  


  

  


    
  


    