



Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn

Mass Shootings in the United StatesUpdated April 15, 2021
By Rosanna Smart, Terry L. SchellSummary: There is no standard definition of what constitutes a mass shooting, and different data sources—such as media outlets, academic researchers, and law enforcement agencies—frequently use different definitions when discussing and analyzing mass shootings. For instance, when various organizations measure and report on mass shootings, the criteria they use in counting such events might differ by the minimum threshold for the number of victims, whether the victim count includes those who were not fatally injured, where the shooting occurred, whether the shooting occurred in connection to another crime, and the relationship between the shooter and the victims. These inconsistencies lead to different assessments of how frequently mass shootings occur and whether they are more common now than they were a decade or two ago.
Data show that, regardless of how one defines mass shootings, perpetrators are likely to be men. But several other characteristics that are statistically predictive of perpetration are still uncommon among offenders on an absolute level. The rare nature of mass shootings creates challenges for accurately identifying salient predictors of risk and limits statistical power for detecting which policies may be effective in reducing mass shooting incidence or lethality. Implementing broader violence prevention strategies rather than focusing specifically on the most-extreme forms of such violence may be effective at reducing the occurrence and lethality of mass shootings.
Incidents of mass firearm violence galvanize public attention. There has been extensive media coverage of many incidents in the United States in which individuals have used firearms to kill large numbers of people. These mass public shootings are rare events—they constitute less than 15 percent of all mass killings in the United States and are responsible for less than 0.5 percent of all homicides (Duwe, 2020)—but they have far-reaching impacts on citizens’ mental health, anxiety, and perceptions of safety (Lowe and Galea, 2017).[1] Mass shootings also frequently generate extensive media coverage related to guns, prompt political discussions about legislative initiatives for how better to prevent gun violence, and may lead to substantial state gun policy changes (Schildkraut, Elsass, and Meredith, 2018; Newman and Hartman, 2019; Luca, Malhotra, and Poliquin, 2020). 
In this essay, we first describe different approaches for defining a mass shooting and discuss how using different definitions can influence estimates of mass shooting levels and trends. We then summarize findings from the literature regarding the characteristics of mass shootings, including offender characteristics, types of firearm(s) used, and community-level correlates. We conclude with a brief discussion of the substantial methodological challenges for evaluating how gun policies affect mass shootings. Our discussion here is focused on mass shootings in the U.S. context.What Is a Mass Shooting?
The U.S. government has never defined mass shooting as a separate category of crime, and there is not yet a broadly accepted definition of the term. In the 1980s, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) defined mass murderer as someone who “kills four or more people in a single incident (not including himself), typically in a single location” (Krouse and Richardson, 2015). In 2013, Congress defined mass killing as a single incident that leaves three or more people dead (Pub. L. 112-265, 2013). However, both definitions include many incidents that would not be considered mass shootings. Furthermore, neither definition was established for the purpose of data collection or statistical analyses. The FBI classification of mass murderer was established primarily with the aim of clarifying criminal profiling procedures (Ressler, Burgess, and Douglas, 1988), and the congressional definition was intended to clarify statutory authority for the provision of U.S. Department of Justice investigatory assistance requested by state and local agencies (Pub. L. 112-265, 2013). Thus, various news outlets, researchers, and law enforcement agencies often use different definitions when reporting on mass shootings, which can complicate our understanding of mass shooting trends and their relationship to gun policy.[2] Table 1 provides examples of the variation in the criteria set by some of the existing data sources on mass shootings in the United States. Depending on which data source is referenced, there were somewhere between six and 503 mass shootings and between 60 and 628 mass shooting fatalities in 2019.

Table 1. Variation in How Mass Shootings Are Defined and Counted




Data Source
Casualty Threshold
(for injuries or deaths by firearm)

Location of Incident
Motivation of Shooter
Number of U.S. Mass Shootings in 2019
Number of Mass Shooting Fatalities in 2019




Mother Jones (see Follman, Aronsen, and Pan, 2020)
Three people fatally injured (excluding shooter)a
Public
Indiscriminate (excludes crimes of armed robbery, gang violence, or domestic violence)
10
73


Gun Violence Archive (undated-a)
Four people fatally or nonfatally injured (excluding shooter)
Any
Any
418
465


Mass Shooter Database (The Violence Project, undated)
Four people fatally injured (excluding shooter)
Public
Indiscriminate (excludes crimes of armed robbery, gang violence, or domestic violence)
6
60


AP/USA TODAY/Northeastern University Mass Killings database (see Associated Press and USA Today, 2019; Callahan, 2019)
Four people fatally injured (excluding shooter)
Any
Any
33
174


Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund (2019)
Four people fatally injured (excluding shooter)
Any
Any
19(in 2018)b
112(in 2018)b



Mass Shooting Tracker (undated)
Four people fatally or nonfatally injured (including shooter)
Any
Any
503
628


Mass Shootings in America database (see Stanford Geospatial Center, undated)
Three people fatally or nonfatally injured (excluding shooter)
Any
Not identifiably related to gangs, drugs, or organized crime
62 (in 2015)c
202 (in 2015)c



a Before January 2013, the casualty threshold for the Mother Jones data was four people fatally injured (excluding the shooter).
b As of this writing, the Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund's Mass Shootings in America website with interactive map was up to date as of April 28, 2020. However, the group's downloadable data included incidents through 2018 only.
c Stanford's Mass Shootings in America database was permanently suspended in mid-2016. In this table, we provide incident and fatality counts for 2015, the last year of complete data collection. For archived data, see Stanford Geospatial Center, 2018.
Although there is no official standard for the casualty threshold that distinguishes a mass shooting from other violent crimes involving a firearm, a common approach in the literature is to set a casualty threshold of four fatalities by firearm, excluding the offender or offenders (Fox and Levin, 1998; Duwe, Kovandzic, and Moody, 2002; Gius, 2015c; Krouse and Richardson, 2015; Fox and Fridel, 2016). Using this criterion helps reduce measurement error in identifying mass shootings because fatalities are captured in administrative data and are frequently included in media reports (Duwe, 2000). However, this categorization is not without controversy. It does not capture incidents in which fewer than four victims were killed but additional victims were nonfatally injured, and it does not include multiple-victim homicides in which fewer than four fatalities resulted from gunshots but additional fatalities occurred by other means. Thus, many have chosen alternative definitions of casualty thresholds for mass shootings. For instance, Lott and Landes (2000) adopted the definition of two or more injured victims, Kleck (2016) used a six-victim casualty threshold, the Gun Violence Archive (undated-a) defined mass shooting as an incident in which four or more victims (excluding the shooter) are injured or killed, and the Mass Shooting Tracker (undated) set a criterion of four or more people injured or killed (including the shooter). 



This page is part of RAND's Gun Policy in America initiative, one of the largest studies ever conducted on the subject. »


Another definitional disagreement is whether to include multiple-victim shooting incidents that occur in connection with some other crime or domestic dispute. Because mass shootings that stem from domestic and gang violence are contextually distinct from high-fatality indiscriminate killings in public venues, some analysts have argued that they should be treated separately. In their analyses of “mass public shootings,” Lott and Landes (2000) excluded any felony-related shooting, and Duwe, Kovandzic, and Moody (2002) excluded incidents where “both the victims and offender(s) were involved in unlawful activities, such as organized crime, gang activity, and drug deals” (p. 276). Similarly, other researchers (e.g., Gius, 2015c; Luca, Malhotra, and Poliquin, 2020) have restricted analyses to events that occurred in a relatively public area and in which victims appeared to have been selected randomly. However, others have claimed that this narrow definition ignores a substantial proportion of gun-related violence from family- or felony-related murder (Fox and Levin, 2015). Furthermore, determinants of whether victims were selected indiscriminately or whether the incidents were gang- or crime-related are, to some degree, subjective. Accurate information about the shooter’s motivations or connection to gangs may not have been included in police or news reports of the incidents. In contrast, the Mass Shooting Tracker and the Gun Violence Archive count as mass shootings all incidents that meet their designated casualty threshold, regardless of the circumstances that led to the event or the motivation of the shooter. 
These definitions make a substantial difference in which incidents are counted.[3] As noted earlier, depending on which data source is used, there were between six and 503 mass shootings in the United States in 2019 (see Table 1); that amounts to a range of incident rates from approximately one incident per 50 million people in the United States to one incident per 1 million people. More-restrictive definitions (e.g., from Mother Jones) focus on the prevalence of higher-profile events motivated by mass murder, but they omit more-common incidents occurring in connection with domestic violence or criminal activity, which make up about 80 percent of mass shooting incidents with four or more fatally injured victims (Krouse and Richardson, 2015). Broader definitions (e.g., from the Gun Violence Archive) provide a more comprehensive depiction of the prevalence of gun violence, but they obscure the variety of circumstances in which these incidents take place and their associated policy implications. Furthermore, if the effects of a firearm policy are expected to affect only mass public shooting incidents, then analyses that include domestic violence mass shootings could obscure identification of the expected effects of the policy. Thus, there is value in having multiple measurements of mass shootings—but only if their definitions are clearly and precisely explained and they are used by researchers in a manner appropriate to the analysis.
Although researchers, policymakers, and reporters may rightly make different decisions about the criteria they wish to use to define what counts as a mass shooting, these decisions fundamentally shape the scope of incidents considered, as well as the potential for measurement error in their data. Data sets that use definitions based solely on objective criteria that are widely available across multiple sources (e.g., fatality counts) likely offer greater reliability compared with data sets that rely on objective criteria that may not be consistently reported across multiple sources (e.g., nonfatal shooting injury counts) or that may be difficult to operationalize (e.g., public location).[4] Data sets that define mass shootings based on relatively subjective criteria (e.g., whether an incident was related to criminal activity or domestic violence) may be particularly difficult to reconcile because underlying sources may disagree or differently report on these factors. Mother Jones, the Mass Shooter Database, and the Mass Shootings in America database are examples of sources that use some subjective criteria. In the absence of a clear conceptual reason for restricting mass shooting incidents of interest based on subjective criteria, evaluations are likely to produce more-reliable and more-replicable results when using data sources that define mass shootings based only on fatality thresholds (see Table 1). 
Another fundamental issue in documenting mass shootings, and in reconciling differences across data sets, is that the methods used to collect information on mass shootings also vary across sources. There is no comprehensive, administrative data source that captures mass shootings; however, data from the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) database provide information from 1976 onward on most homicides in the United States, typically including information on the weapon types, number of victims, and number of offenders involved, which can be used to identify which incidents meet specific definitional thresholds of fatalities (Puzzanchera, Chamberlin, and Kang, 2018).[5] When such details are known, the SHR database also provides information on victim-offender relationships (e.g., husband or wife, stranger, neighbor)[6] and incident circumstances (e.g., “gangland killing,” “lovers’ triangle,” “brawl due to influence of alcohol”), which could be used as indicators of familicides and felony-related killings. However, the SHR database relies on voluntary submissions by thousands of separate law enforcement agencies. It does not capture all incidents (about 90 percent completeness), and this missingness is not random. Sometimes, entire states do not submit data for a year or for part of a year, and in most states and years, at least some law enforcement agencies do not submit complete data (Fox, 2004; Fox and Swatt, 2009). In addition to missingness by jurisdiction, there is a high degree of missingness for data elements, particularly in offender characteristics (e.g., the offender may not be known) and incident characteristics (e.g., circumstances or victim-offender relationship).[7] Some analyses have also compared SHR variables with data in police incident reports in specific jurisdictions and found evidence of misclassification regarding victim-offender relationship and incident circumstances (Pizarro and Zeoli, 2013). Others have cross-referenced SHR incidents with historical news records and found issues of coding errors in the SHR database that could affect identification of mass shooting incidents (e.g., double counting of victims or incidents, misclassifying a nonfatal injury as a fatal injury) (Duwe, 2000). Although researchers have noted that these recording errors are relatively uncommon in the SHR, the errors are still important considerations for using the SHR to assess mass shootings (Duwe, 2000; Fox, 2006). Finally, the SHR provides relatively limited detail on offender or victim characteristics, firearm types, and incident setting.
Given these limitations, most data sources for mass shootings do not derive solely from the SHR. Some sources (e.g., the AP/USA TODAY/Northeastern University Mass Killings database) combine information from both news reports and the SHR, others (e.g., Mother Jones) rely on news reports alone, and some (e.g., the Mass Shooter Database) combine information from law enforcement records, social media, court transcripts, news accounts, and other primary and secondary sources to obtain detailed information on the characteristics of each incident and offender (see Table 2). Differences in data collection strategies, in large part, reflect differences in the mass shooting definitions employed (e.g., sources that count nonfatal shooting injuries in their criteria must rely on sources other than the SHR, which captures only fatal injuries), as well as differences in the proposed purpose of the database. 

Table 2. Data Collection Methods and Data Elements Captured Across Mass Shooting
Data Sources




Data Source and Year Established
Stated Purpose of the Data Set
Methods for Data Collection
Time Perioda
Data Elements Capturedb




Mother JonesEstablished 2012
To track the "distinct phenomenon" of indiscriminate shooting rampages in public places resulting in four or more victims killed (later, three or more victims killed)
Media reports
1982–present
City, state, latitude, and longitude; date; number of fatalities; number injured; setting; shooter gender, race, and age; prior signs of mental health problems for shooter; method of gun acquisition; gun type


Gun Violence ArchiveEstablished 2013
To provide data about gun violence in near real time
Automated queries and manual research of more than 7,500 sources (e.g., local and state police records, media, government reports, existing data aggregates)Each case involves secondary validation and de-duplication.
2014–present
City, state, latitude, and longitude; date; number of fatalities; number injured; victim name, age, and gender; suspect or offender name, age, and gender; incident resolution; summary of incident; weapons involved (gun type, whether stolen)


Mass Shooter DatabaseEstablished 2017
To study the life histories of mass shooters who shot and killed four or more people in a public place
Primary sources (e.g., social media, correspondence with perpetrators) and secondary sources (e.g., media, court transcripts, journal articles, autopsy reports, medical, school, and law enforcement records)Each case involves independent validation and de-duplication.
1966–2019
City, state; incident setting; perpetrator age and gender; number killed; 100 life-history variables for offender, including mental health history, trauma, interest in past shootings, and situational triggers


AP/USA TODAY/ Northeastern University Mass Killings databaseEstablished 2006
To provide a comprehensive repository on every mass murder (four or more people, excluding the killer, killed within a span of 24 hours)
Media reports and the SHR database Further details are not provided. Data are not currently publicly available.
2006–2019
City, state; date; number of victims; method (e.g., shooting); weapon type; incident summary 


Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund mass shootings databasecEstablished 2013
To understand mass shootings (four or more killed) and help point lawmakers to strategies to prevent such events
Primarily media reports, supplemented with the SHR database and police and court records
2009–present
City, state; date; number killed (by sex); number injured (by sex); number under age 20 killed; number of law enforcement officer deaths and injuries; setting; gun types; shooter age, sex, prohibited possessor status, outcome; whether shooter displayed dangerous warning signs and had prior history of domestic violence; whether there was high-capacity magazine use; incident summary 


Mass Shooting TrackerEstablished 2013
To track all mass shootings with more than three people shot in a single spree
Crowd-sourced data collection, unknown procedures
2013–present
City, state; number killed; number injured; brief incident name and summary (e.g., offender name, victims) 


Mass Shootings in America databaseEstablished 2012
To provide a curated set of spatial and temporal data about mass shootings in the United States, taken from online media sources, with the aim of facilitating research on gun violence in the United States
Online media resourcesIn general, a minimum of three corroborating sources are required to add the full record into the data set.
1966–2016
City, state, latitude, and longitude; date, day of week; number of shooters; number of civilian deaths and injuries; number of law enforcement officer deaths and injuries; shooter age, name, sex, and outcome; number (and types) of guns; setting; motive; shooter history of mental illness; shooter military experience; incident summary 



a In this column, present means the beginning of 2021.
b This column represents the data elements that the source attempts to capture; in many cases, these fields are missing information.
c For this data set and reporting on it, see Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, 2019.
However, variation in the sources examined to identify incidents can result in varying degrees of completeness or reliability. Data sets that rely solely on news sources or crowd-sourcing (i.e., Mother Jones, the Mass Shooting Tracker, and the Mass Shootings in America database) may systematically miss lower-profile incidents and those involving fewer injuries or fatalities (Duwe, 2000; Schildkraut, Elsass, and Meredith, 2018). Systemic biases in the types of incidents that receive widespread media coverage affect the number of incidents that are counted but might also misrepresent the relative characteristics of offenders, victims, or communities involved (Silva and Capellan, 2019a, 2019b). For example, news reports may be less likely to include the perpetrator’s race when he or she is White (Park, Holody, and Zhang, 2012) and may be more likely to include speculation about gang involvement when racial and ethnic minorities are involved (Entman and Gross, 2008). Given media sources’ limited capacity to cover all current events, mass shootings that occur during other newsworthy events (e.g., presidential elections) may also be systematically missed, particularly in historical analysis relying on print or television media. Finally, the media landscape has changed dramatically over the past three decades; daily local newspapers have disappeared across much of the United States, and the extent to which news sources are searchable on the internet has also changed (Duwe, 2000).
Thus, any comparison over time in the number or characteristics of mass shootings necessarily involves comparisons across different media sources with different coverage areas, intended audiences, and editorial practices. Data sources that combine information across media reports and law enforcement administrative data—for example, the Gun Violence Archive, the Mass Shooter Database, the Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund mass shootings database, and the AP/USA TODAY/Northeastern University Mass Killings database—are likely to be more complete, particularly in measuring incidents over a longer historical time frame. However, it is a challenging effort to ensure that different sources of information about the same incident are properly linked (i.e., without a unique incident identifier, researchers must make linkages based on similarities in date, location, and incident information, which may not be identical across different reports of the same incident) so that multiple reports are not counted as separate incidents. Thus, data sets that triangulate across multiple underlying sources (e.g., the Mass Shooter Database and the Gun Violence Archive) require additional effort toward de-duplication and validation.
And even when data sources use the same definition of what constitutes a mass shooting, variation in data collection methods can result in different estimates of mass shooting prevalence. As an example of this issue, Duwe (2020) triangulated information from the SHR, online newspaper databases, and unpublished mass shooting data sets and found that the Mother Jones database missed more than 40 percent of mass shootings that met the source’s own criteria between 1982 and 2013. Greater missingness occurred for incidents further back in time, likely because of greater challenges with accessing comprehensive news accounts prior to widespread use of digital media for news reporting. Comparing four data sources for mass shootings (the Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund’s mass shootings database, the Gun Violence Archive, the Mother Jones database, and the FBI’s SHR database), and applying the same definition of mass shooting to each (four or more fatalities, excluding the shooter), Booty et al. (2019) found that estimates of the number of mass shootings in 2017 ranged from five (Mother Jones) to 24 (Gun Violence Archive). When triangulating across data sets, the researchers identified 32 unique mass shooting incidents, but only two incidents (6.3 percent) were common to all four data sources. For further discussion, see Booty et al. (2019), Duwe (2000, 2020), and Huff-Corzine and Corzine (2020), which contain a more comprehensive discussion of data collection efforts and their limitations.Are Mass Shootings on the Rise?
In 2014, the FBI released a study showing that “active shooting incidents” had increased at an average annual rate of 16 percent between 2000 and 2013 (Blair and Schweit, 2014).[8] In contrast to the varied definitions for mass shootings, there is an agreed-upon definition among government agencies for active shooter: “an individual actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a confined and populated area; in most cases, active shooters use firearm(s) and there is no pattern or method to their selection of victims” (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2008, p. 2). Using a modified version of this definition to include incidents that had multiple offenders or occurred in confined spaces, Blair and Schweit (2014) found that active shootings had increased from only one incident in 2000 to 17 in 2013. The FBI active shooting reports, which are now produced annually, identified 20 active shooter incidents in 2016, 30 incidents in 2017, 27 incidents in 2018, and 28 incidents in 2019 (FBI, 2018g, 2019g, 2020).
Although Blair and Schweit (2014) explicitly stated that their original FBI active shooter study was “not a study of mass killings or mass shootings” (p. 5), extensive media coverage cited the study as evidence of a sharp rise in mass shootings and mass shooting fatalities (Lott, 2015). However, Blair and Schweit (2014)’s definition of an active shooter incident includes some incidents that would be excluded under any of the commonly used criteria for mass public shootings (see Table 1) because it does not set any casualty threshold. For example, Blair and Schweit’s definition includes some incidents in which no people were injured or in which one person was killed and no others were wounded. Setting a threshold of zero victims increases the potential for measurement error, because shooting incidents with no casualties are more difficult to identify from police records and are less likely to receive media coverage (Duwe, Kovandzic, and Moody, 2002). Additionally, because it should be relatively easier to identify more-recent shootings with few fatalities, a low casualty threshold will tend to systematically bias estimates of the number of shootings upward over time.[9] Even when using a higher-fatality threshold, mass shooting data sources that rely solely on news reports to identify cases also appear to systematically undercount incidents from earlier periods (see previous section and Duwe, 2020).
Even when a more restrictive casualty threshold of four or more fatally injured victims (excluding the shooter) is imposed, empirical evidence on trends in these incidents varies depending on whether the motivation of the shooter is included as a criterion for considering an event a mass shooting. In their analysis of mass shooting trends from 1999 to 2013, Krouse and Richardson (2015) distinguished among mass shootings occurring in public locations that are indiscriminate in nature (“mass public shootings”), mass shootings in which the majority of victims are members of the offender’s family and that are not attributable to other criminal activity (“familicide mass shootings”), and mass shootings that occur in connection to some other criminal activity (“other felony mass shootings”). Duwe (2020) adopted similar distinctions in his analysis of mass shootings over the longer time frame of 1976 to 2018.
Figures 1 and 2 show trends in mass shooting incidents and mass shooting fatalities, using the data provided by Duwe (2020), who created his own data set aggregating across several of the sources described in this essay. Using Krouse and Richardson (2015)’s definition of “mass public shootings,” Duwe (2020) found that such events constituted about 19 percent of all mass shooting incidents and 27 percent of all mass shooting fatalities from 1976 to 2018. The data from multiple studies suggest a slight increase in the incidence rate of mass public shootings over the past four decades (Cohen, Azrael, and Miller, 2014; Krouse and Richardson, 2015; Duwe, 2020). From 2016 to 2018, the annual rate of mass public shooting incidents was about one incident per 50 million people in the United States (Duwe, 2020). Considering the number of fatalities in these shootings, this corresponds to approximately 0.4 percent of all homicides, or approximately 0.2 percent of all firearm deaths, over that period. However, using an expanded definition of mass shootings that includes domestic- or felony-related killings, there is little evidence to suggest that mass shooting incidents or fatalities have increased (Cohen, Azrael, and Miller, 2014; Krouse and Richardson, 2015; Fox and Fridel, 2016). Adjusted for changes in the size of the U.S. population, the incidence of all mass shootings (four or more fatally injured victims, excluding the offender, regardless of shooter motivation or circumstances) was highest in the late 1980s and early 1990s, averaging one incident per 10 million people from 1989 to 1993 (Duwe, 2020). More recently, between 2016 and 2018, the annual rate of all mass shooting incidents was about one incident per 14 million people (Duwe, 2020). Considering the number of fatalities in these mass shootings, this corresponds to approximately 0.8 percent of all homicides, or approximately 0.4 percent of all firearm deaths, over that period. Thus, different choices about how to define a mass shooting result in different findings for both the prevalence of these events at a given time and whether their frequency has changed over time. 

Figure 1. Trends in Mass Shooting Incidents, 1976–2018
SOURCE: Author analysis of data from Duwe, 2020.

Figure 2. Trends in Mass Shooting Fatalities, 1976–2018
SOURCE: Author analysis of data from Duwe, 2020.Even if we set aside the facts that reliance on different data sources over time complicates measurement and that findings can depend on how mass shootings are defined, the relative rarity of mass shooting events makes analysis of trends particularly difficult. Chance variability in the annual number of mass shooting incidents makes it hard to discern a clear trend in the risk of such incidents, and trend estimates are sensitive to outliers and to the time frame chosen for analysis (Fox and DeLateur, 2014). For example, although Krouse and Richardson (2015) found evidence of an upward trend in mass public shootings from 1999 to 2013, they noted that the increase was driven largely by events in 2012, in which there was an unusually high number of mass public shooting incidents. Additionally, Lott (2015) suggested that the FBI study’s estimate of a dramatic increase in active shooter incidents was largely driven by the choice of 2000 as the starting date, because that year had an unusually low number of shooting incidents. Conducting his own analysis to cover 1977 through 2014, and adjusting the data to exclude events with fewer than two fatalities, Lott (2015) found a much smaller and statistically insignificant increase (less than 1 percent annually) in mass shooting fatalities over time. However, when other researchers extended the time frame to cover more-recent years and used a four-fatality threshold for mass public shootings, their findings suggested a significant increase in the incidence and lethality of these events over time (Sanders and Lei, 2018; Duwe, 2020; Lankford and Silver, 2020). 
The leverage of extreme incidents is even clearer when examining trends in the number of casualties from mass public shootings over time (Figure 3). The data on deaths and injuries from 2017 mass public shootings are particularly striking: Just one of the seven incidents that occurred (the Las Vegas shooting in October 2017) accounted for more than half of all mass public shooting fatalities and nonfatal injuries in that year.[10] However, even when we exclude the Las Vegas incident, 2008 through 2018 saw the highest average rate of casualties from mass public shootings since the 1970s. In 2018, mass public shootings were responsible for approximately one death per 4 million people in the United States (Duwe, 2020), representing fewer than one of every 200 homicides in that year.
Although different choices about how to define a mass shooting and the period over which to calculate mass shooting trends have resulted in disagreement about whether the frequency of mass shootings has risen, there is clear evidence that the media’s use of the term mass shooting has increased significantly in recent decades (Roeder, 2016). Unfortunately, the trends one finds in measuring mass shootings over time depend heavily on how the term is defined and the precise period over which the trend is observed, and these trends are likely to be biased by changes in the completeness of the underlying data sources over time. This ambiguity makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions about how these incidents have changed over time or how that information should be used as we try to understand the determinants, costs, and policy implications of mass shootings.
Figure 3. Trends in Mass Public Shooting Casualties, 1976–2018
SOURCE: Author analysis of data from Duwe, 2020.Characteristics of Mass Public Shootings
Several studies, largely focused on mass public shootings, have sought to describe the characteristics of individuals who perpetrate mass shootings, evaluate characteristics of each mass shooting incident, and identify the behaviors and motivations that preceded each incident. Most of these studies are purely descriptive, not comparative, and thus should not be interpreted as providing evidence of whether specific individual-level or community-level characteristics are predictive of someone perpetrating a mass shooting. 
According to this literature (see, for example, Capellan et al., 2019; Duwe, 2020), the perpetrators of mass public shootings in the United States have been overwhelmingly male (98 percent) and are most commonly non-Hispanic White (61 percent). In addition, they are most commonly younger than age 45 (82 percent); more specifically, 26 percent of mass public shooters from 1976 to 2018 were younger than age 25, 27 percent were aged 25 to 34, and 29 percent were aged 35 to 44. Relative to the overall U.S. population, mass public shooting offenders are much more likely to be male and are somewhat younger; relative to other homicide offenders, males and non-Hispanic Whites are overrepresented among mass public shooters, and mass public shooters are older. For comparison, of the overall U.S. population in 2019, approximately 49 percent was male, 60 percent was younger than age 45, and 60 percent was non-Hispanic White (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020). Of murderers in 2018 with known offender characteristics, 88 percent were men, 84 percent were younger than age 45 (38 percent younger than 25, 31 percent aged 25 to 34, and 16 percent aged 35 to 44), and 42 percent were White (Hispanic ethnicity information was not provided) (FBI, 2019f). 
Media coverage often links mass public shootings with serious mental illness (McGinty et al., 2014, 2016), but estimates of the prevalence of mental illness among mass public shooting offenders vary widely depending on the types of incidents considered and the methods used to define and identify mental illness. Rates of formal diagnoses of psychotic disorders (including diagnoses made post-incident, which may be affected by the incident itself) among mass public shooters are estimated to be about 15 to 17 percent (Stone, 2015; Fox and Fridel, 2016).[11] Studies that use a broader definition of mental illness and consider informal evidence indicative of mental health problems (e.g., statements by law enforcement or family before or after the incident) have found prevalence rates ranging from 30 to 60 percent (Taylor, 2018; Capellan et al., 2019; Duwe, 2020). This informal evidence, which is often obtained subsequent to the incident, is invariably affected by the act of mass violence itself (Skeem and Mulvey, 2020). It does not suggest that mental illness is useful for predicting a subsequent mass shooting. Of note, a study of 106 perpetrators of mass public shootings in the United States between 1990 and 2014 found that less than 5 percent of offenders (n = 5) had a history of involuntary commitment or adjudication of dangerousness that would have prohibited them from purchasing a firearm following the federal mental health background check (Silver, Fisher, and Horgan, 2018). Although most research supports that, overall, people with serious mental illness are overrepresented among mass public shooters (Duwe, 2020; Skeem and Mulvey, 2020), this does not imply that serious mental illness causes mass shootings, just as we cannot conclude that being a young man causes mass shootings.



The Experts Weigh In
Compare expert opinions on how gun policies may affect mass shootings in your state and the U.S. as a whole. »


Other researchers and analysts have noted that many mass shooters have a history of domestic violence. Using three mass shooting databases (whose underlying data sources include media reports, court records, and police records) and their own search of criminal records, Zeoli and Paruk (2020) analyzed 89 individuals who perpetrated a mass shooting (involving four or more fatalities, excluding the offender) between 2014 and 2017. Of the 89 individuals, 28 (31 percent) had a history of suspected domestic violence. The authors identified that, of those 28, 17 (61 percent) had prior interaction with the criminal justice system related to domestic violence, and six individuals had a felony or misdemeanor conviction for domestic violence. Using a different definition of mass shooting (involving four or more casualties, including the perpetrator, and excluding felony-related mass shootings), Gu (2020) found that 36 percent of mass shooting incidents from 2014 to 2019 involved an offender with a history of domestic violence or violence against women. Of note, both of these studies included mass shooting familicides, which represent the modal type of mass shooting. Given that intimate partner homicides are commonly preceded by prior incidents of nonfatal domestic violence (Campbell et al., 2007), it may be expected that perpetrators of mass shooting familicides commonly have prior histories of domestic violence. In a study of mass murders from 2006 to 2016 (74 percent of which were shootings), Fridel (2017) found that 30 percent of familicides, 7 percent of mass public killings, and 3 percent of felony-related killings involved an offender with a known history of domestic violence.[12] But because we do not know the rate of domestic violence in the general population based on comparable definitions and data sources, it is not clear the precise extent to which prior domestic violence represents a risk factor for perpetrating a mass shooting. 
It is challenging to make broad generalizations about the individual-level motivations of mass shootings. When mass shootings are broadly defined to include familicides, felony-related killings, and mass public shootings, the events include heterogeneous incident types that vary in terms of victim, offender, and incident characteristics (Fridel, 2017; Taylor, 2018). Felony-related killings exhibit particular differences from familicides and mass public shootings. They are, by definition, criminally motivated (in contrast to familicides and mass public shootings, which are more commonly motivated by relationship problems, group grievances, or ideological extremist beliefs); result in significantly fewer deaths; and are significantly less likely to conclude with the death of the perpetrator (Fridel, 2017; Capellan et al., 2019).[13] The etiology of felony-related mass shootings thus, unsurprisingly, bears a stronger resemblance to firearm homicides more broadly. In contrast, familicides and mass public shootings show stronger similarities in terms of offender characteristics and motivations (Fridel, 2017).
Even the subset of mass public shootings seems to encompass a variety of offender types, and some researchers have suggested that the relative prevalence of these offender typologies has changed over time (Capellan et al., 2019).[14] When Capellan and colleagues considered incidents in which an offender used a firearm to kill or “attempt to kill” four or more victims in a public setting, they found that school shootings constituted the majority of mass public shooting incidents in the 1960s and 1970s, and workplace shootings became increasingly prevalent in the 1980s to 2000s (Capellan and Gomez, 2018; Capellan et al., 2019).[15] The past decade has seen an increase in the percentage of mass public shootings that are posited to relate to fame-seeking on behalf of the individual or on behalf of a broader ideology (Capellan et al., 2019; Lankford and Silver, 2020). Some researchers have suggested that this rise in fame‐ and attention‐seeking motivations among mass public shooters has contributed to an escalation in the lethality of these incidents (Langman, 2018; Lankford and Silver, 2020).
Although there are some noted differences across different types of mass public shootings (Capellan and Anisin, 2018; Capellan et al., 2019), an overarching commonality is that most incidents are preceded by some level of planning by the shooter. Among active shooting cases from 2000 to 2013 for which sufficient information was available, 62 percent of offenders planned the attack for more than one month, and 9 percent planned for more than one year (Silver, Simons, and Craun, 2018). Focusing on incidents involving eight or more fatally injured victims, Lankford and Silver (2020) found that at least half of the 18 high-fatality mass public shootings between 2010 and 2019 involved a planning period of one year or longer. About 40 percent of mass public shooters make some form of verbal or written threat (e.g., threats made in front of family or friends or posted to social media) prior to the incident (Duwe, 2020).
Another strand of research has described the types of firearms used in mass shooting incidents and the extent to which variation in weapon choice relates to the lethality of the incident. There are noted challenges to conducting such analyses, partly because of the absence of any official data source that provides complete information on the types of firearms or associated equipment (e.g., ammunition, magazines, scopes) used in shootings (for further discussion, see Koper, 2020). It is common for multiple firearms to be involved in public shootings: Various studies have indicated that multiple firearms were involved in an estimated 34 percent of active shooting incidents across 2000–2017 (de Jager et al., 2018), 42 percent of mass public shooting incidents across 1999–2013 (Krouse and Richardson, 2015), and 79 percent of mass public shooting incidents that resulted in eight or more fatalities across 1966–2019 (Lankford and Silver, 2020). In an analysis of mass public shootings in which shooters attempted to kill at least four individuals, Capellan and Jiao (2019) found that 80 percent of offenders had prior access to a firearm, although 41 percent of those individuals obtained additional firearms for the incident.
As shown in Table 3, handguns are the firearm most commonly involved in active shootings and mass shootings; semiautomatic rifles or “assault-style” weapons are used in an estimated 10 to 36 percent of active shootings and mass shootings.[16] The use of large-capacity magazines (LCMs) is more common in mass public shootings and high-fatality mass shooting incidents than it is in firearm crimes overall. The estimated prevalence of LCM involvement in mass shootings ranges from 20 to 60 percent, or from 45 to 60 percent when restricting the denominator to mass public shootings or high-fatality mass shootings (Table 3). For comparison, LCM-equipped firearms are estimated to constitute 22 to 36 percent of crime guns recovered by police in most urban jurisdictions (Koper et al., 2018). The estimated prevalence of LCM-equipped firearms in the overall stock of civilian-owned firearms is about 15 to 20 percent, although these estimates come from survey data from 1994, and the prevalence has likely increased since then (Cook and Ludwig, 1996; Kleck, 2020).Table 3. Percentage of Mass Shooting Incidents Involving the Use of a Firearm with
a Large-Capacity Magazine or the Use of a Semiautomatic Rifle or Assault
Weapon


Data Source
Mass Shooting Definition
Period of Study and Number of incidents
Firearm with an LCMa(%)
Semiautomatic Rifle or Assault Weaponb(%)




Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund (2018)
Four or more people fatally injured
2009–2017,n = 173
20–58
NR


Koper et al. (2018)
Four or more people fatally injured
2009–2015, n = 145
19–57
10–36


Krouse and Richardson (2015)
Four or more people fatally injured
1999–2013, n = 317
NR
10


Klarevas (2016)
Six or more people fatally injured
1966–2015, n = 111
47
26


Krouse and Richardson (2015)
Public, did not involve other crimes, four or more people fatally injured
1999–2013, n = 66
NR
27



Follman, Aronsen, and Pan (2020)
Public, did not involve other crimes, four or more people fatally injured
1982–Jan 2019, n = 92
45–61(or higher)
NR


Capellan and Jiao (2019)
Public, did not involve other crimes, attempted to kill four or more people
1966–2017, n = 318
NR
10–34


Klarevas (2019)
Public, did not involve other crimes, four or more people fatally injured
1966–2017, n = 43
NR
30


Lankford and Silver (2020)
Public, did not involve other crimes, eight or more people fatally injured 
1966–2019, n = 34
NR
44


de Jager et al. (2018)
Active shooting
2000–2017, n = 248
NR
25


Blau, Gorry, and Wade (2016)c
Mass shooting, spree shooting, or active shooting
1982–2014, n = 184
37
34



SOURCE: Information obtained from Blau, Gorry, and Wade (2016), de Jager et al. (2018), Capellan and Jiao (2019), Klarevas (2019), Koper (2020), and Lankford and Silver (2020).
NOTE: NR = not reported.
a An LCM is considered to be an ammunition feeding device capable of holding more than ten rounds of ammunition. Koper et al. (2018) includes incidents that involved gun models commonly sold with an LCM, even if the magazine recovered was not reported.
b There is no agreed-upon definition of assault weapon, and studies differed in how such rifles or weapons were defined. Most studies considered specific firearms based on federal definitions (Krouse and Richardson, 2015) or a combination of state and federal definitions (Klarevas, 2016, 2019; Koper et al., 2018); some studies (de Jager et al., 2018; Koper et al., 2018; Capellan and Jiao, 2019) considered upper bounds based on a broader definition to include all semiautomatic rifles. The exact definition used was unclear in some studies (Blau, Gorry, and Wade, 2016; Lankford and Silver, 2020).
c The criteria for incident inclusion used by Blau, Gorry, and Wade (2016) are somewhat unclear, but the authors appear to consider mass public shootings with four or more fatalities, public spree shootings with two or more fatalities, and active shooter incidents identified by the FBI.
Finally, a few 2018 and 2019 studies have described community-level characteristics associated with mass shooting incidence. County-level analyses of mass shootings (excluding felony-related mass shootings) from 1990 to 2015 show a higher incidence rate of mass shootings occurring in counties with higher levels of or increasing trends in income inequality (Cabrera and Kwon, 2018; Kwon and Cabrera, 2019a, 2019c), higher population density (Cabrera and Kwon, 2018; Kwon and Cabrera, 2019b, 2019c), higher levels of residential instability (Kwon and Cabrera, 2019b), and lower levels of civic engagement (Kwon and Cabrera, 2019b). However, these findings may simply reflect the fact that mass shootings are more likely to occur in more-populous urban areas where larger gatherings of people are likely to be found; these estimated associations do not clearly show a causal effect of economic or sociocultural conditions on mass shootings.Research on Policies That Might Reduce Mass Shootings
The nature of mass shootings creates serious challenges for developing policies that will effectively prevent their occurrence. For instance, their rarity makes it difficult to extract generalizable information to identify useful predictors of risk. The low base rates of these events also ensure that policies targeting individuals based on risk factors would result in an extremely high rate of false positives; even the best available risk factors can identify only a subpopulation in which the risk of committing a mass shooting is on the order of one in a million. Finally, because individuals who perpetrate mass shootings often die by suicide (or expect to be killed by someone trying to stop the shooting), standard deterrence strategies used in crime prevention are unlikely to work; increasing the certainty or severity of punishments seems unlikely to be effective when the perpetrator already expects to die in the mass shooting.[17]
The relative rarity of mass shooting incidents, and particularly mass public shooting incidents, also makes it challenging to empirically assess whether existing policies are effective in preventing them. Since 2015, there has been an increase in published research that takes causal inference methods commonly used to evaluate policy effects on other forms of gun violence and applies these methods to study the effects of state firearm policies on mass shooting incidence or mass shooting fatalities.[18] However, mass shootings are sufficiently rare that the statistical assumptions of these methods rarely hold, threatening the validity of the effect estimates and statistical inference and potentially resulting in spurious effects (Xue et al., 2017).[19] In some cases, modeling rare outcome data with a large number of covariates can result in quasi- or complete separation, whereby one or more of the covariates perfectly predicts the outcome (Albert and Anderson, 1984).[20] Even if models do converge, the sparseness of these outcome data risk model overfitting and biased estimates. These issues are likely exacerbated in studies that adopt narrower definitions of mass shootings—for example, restricting the definition to mass public shootings or to mass public shootings involving a higher threshold of fatalities.
Even in studies that use models more appropriate for the distributional characteristics of mass shooting outcomes, the high degree of variability in mass shooting prevalence, injuries, and fatalities makes analyses of the effects of state policies on mass shooting outcomes subject to extremely low statistical power. Even if a state passed a policy that had large effects on mass public shootings (e.g., it cut the probability of such incidents in half), it is still unlikely that a study of that policy using appropriate statistical methods would find it to have a statistically significant effect. This occurs because most states already have zero mass public shootings in any given year, and, when the rate in the pre-period was already at, or very close to, zero, it is not possible to detect a decline in the risk of such shootings that is due to the policy—no matter how large that effect may be. This pervasive lack of statistical power can result in a published literature characterized by exaggerated effect sizes for any effects that are found to be statistically significant, and these significant estimates, in many cases, may misidentify the direction of the true effect (Gelman and Carlin, 2014). 
Further complicating identification of the causal effects of policies on mass shootings is the potential issue of reciprocal causation; that is, high-profile mass shooting incidents may themselves prompt legislative changes. Luca, Malhotra, and Poliquin (2020) evaluated the association of mass public shooting occurrence in states with subsequent legislative activity related to firearms. Using data from 1989 to 2014, they found a 15-percent increase in the number of state firearm bills introduced in the year following a mass shooting; states with Democratic-controlled legislatures did not show significant effects of firearm laws enacted, while states with Republican-controlled legislatures were significantly more likely to enact more-permissive gun laws subsequent to a mass public shooting incident in the state. If mass public shootings are a cause rather than (or in addition to) a consequence of firearm policy, models that fail to appropriately account for this reciprocal relationship may produce biased and misleading estimates of the effects of laws on mass shootings. 
Given statistical challenges with accurately estimating the causal effects of a policy on mass shootings, we may be able to learn more about the potential for effective prevention strategies through detailed analyses of the characteristics of mass shootings (ideally for both incidents that occurred and incidents that are believed to have been averted) or through detailed review of how specific policies are being implemented in an effort to prevent mass shootings. Descriptive evidence that mass shootings involving firearms equipped with LCMs result in significantly higher injury and fatality rates may suggest potential benefits of restricting access to LCMs (Koper, 2020), although it may be that the choice to use LCMs reflects more-lethal intentions of the shooter (Kleck, 2016).[21] Similarly, evidence that many mass shooters have a history of domestic violence has led some to suggest potential benefits of stronger implementation of firearm prohibitions related to domestic violence (Zeoli and Paruk, 2020). Finally, although extreme risk protection orders are most commonly requested because of concerns about self-harm (Parker, 2015; Swanson et al., 2017, 2019), a detailed review of case records from 159 such orders issued in California found that 21 (13.2 percent) involved an individual who had access to or was planning to access firearms and expressed or exhibited behavior suggesting intent to perpetrate a mass shooting (Wintemute et al., 2019). These analyses do not directly assess the causal effect of policies on mass shooting outcomes, but they can still provide important insights for crafting and implementing policies.Conclusions
It is difficult to make accurate generalizations about mass shootings. These challenges occur, in part, because (1) there are many different definitions for mass shootings, each of which may be useful for a somewhat different purpose; (2) we have incomplete data sources that do not track these events in a consistent manner over time, likely include a biased sample of incidents, and lack the full range of individual and incident characteristics researchers are interested in; and (3) there are statistical limitations inherent in trying to draw inferences from rare and idiosyncratic events. Using definitions that differ in their thresholds for the number and type of victims or the circumstances around the incident results in vastly different estimates of how often mass shooting events occur, how the rate has changed over time, and incident characteristics. Even across studies with a similar definition of a mass shooting, the different data sources (or combinations of data sources) used sometimes result in different findings. A comprehensive administrative data source that reliably captures mass shooting incidents with sufficient detail does not exist; relying on news reports alone is problematic because of well-established systemic bias in what gets reported. Although these issues create problems for understanding the prevalence and patterns of mass shootings at a given point in time, they are exacerbated when trying to understand how mass shootings have evolved over time; this is because of temporal variation in the completeness of underlying data sources that could be used to identify and classify incidents. There may be fewer concerns regarding incomplete or biased data when adopting a narrower definition of mass shootings that includes only the highest-profile incidents with multiple fatalities, but movement toward a more restrictive definition results in identifying a set of incidents that are increasingly rare and idiosyncratic. Thus, the researcher makes a trade-off that mitigates the serious problems with the underlying data but creates additional statistical problems resulting from a much smaller sample size that will not support accurate generalizations to a broader population of mass shooters.
Greater consensus about the number of mass shootings and how their prevalence has changed over time could likely be achieved by adopting a mass shooting definition based on objective criteria for which data are widely available. Defining incidents based on a threshold of fatalities rather than of nonfatal injuries is likely to produce more-reliable and more-comparable estimates over time. However, even a definition that includes nonfatal injuries is arguably preferable to one that requires having accurate data on victim-offender relationship, incident circumstances, or perpetrator motivations. These features, though captured in some administrative data sources and potentially identifiable through reviews of news reports or court and police records, are often subjectively determined and are inconsistently available in the underlying data. Relative to the criterion of number of victims, assessment of whether a mass shooting incident was related to criminal activity or whether victims were selected randomly is more likely to be influenced by the perspective of the person reporting or recording the information. Depending on the purpose of the research, it may still be necessary to rely on these more-subjective characteristics. However, researchers may need to consider the extent to which they are studying the characteristics of the events themselves rather than, for instance, how the media covers these incidents. 
Even if we did have definitive and complete data sources on the characteristics of all mass shooting incidents, it is still likely to be exceedingly difficult to identify useful predictors of mass shootings. With the exception of male sex, risk factors that appear to be overrepresented among mass shooters relative to the general population are often still uncommon among offenders on an absolute level. Thus, even if one could find a way to prevent individuals with a documented serious mental illness from committing a mass shooting—for example, developing and delivering effective treatments to more than 10 million Americans (Bose et al., 2018) or effectively preventing their access to firearms—most mass shootings would still occur because only a fraction of mass shootings are committed by individuals with a documented history of serious mental illness. Researchers are exploring novel machine learning approaches to using information on domestic violence dispatches or patterns of firearm acquisition for violence risk prediction (Berk and Sorenson, 2020; Laqueur and Wintemute, 2020), although the value of these approaches for predicting mass violence is still unknown. Other approaches focused on reducing the lethality of mass shootings may be effective in mitigating the harms of some incidents, even if the approaches do not prevent the occurrence of such incidents.
Finally, even if states and other jurisdictions developed and implemented policies that prevented mass shootings, there are several statistical challenges that make it unlikely that researchers will be able to demonstrate statistically significant benefits of the effective policies. The assumptions underlying many of the approaches commonly used to evaluate the effects of gun policies are likely not to be met when assessing effects on mass shooting incidence or lethality. The rare nature of mass shootings, and particularly mass public shootings, seriously limits statistical power for detecting policy effects, and studies that find statistically significant associations of policies with mass shootings may greatly overestimate the magnitude of these effects.
However, these difficulties should not impede policymakers from trying to develop and implement better policies. Mass shootings are tragic, traumatic, and shocking events. Because of that, they attract media attention and galvanize public opinion. However, they represent a very small fraction of the homicides in the United States. Precisely because mass shootings are so rare and it is so difficult to predict exactly who will perpetrate them, the overall costs and benefits of any policy to address them are likely to be driven by the policy’s effects on a broader set of far more-common outcomes, such as overall homicide, suicide, domestic violence, and population health. Improved treatment for mental health problems or suicidality might reduce certain types of mass shootings, but such policies may also reduce far more-common forms of homicide, suicide, and crime and may also improve economic productivity and social well-being. Similarly, policies aimed at reducing domestic violence or preventing crime are worth pursuing for those benefits, and they may also reduce the incidence of some types of mass shootings (i.e., familicides, felony-related killings). Focusing efforts on implementing public policies that reduce violence more broadly, rather than making policy decisions based only on the most-extreme forms of such violence, may not eliminate mass shootings but may reduce their occurrence and lethality and ultimately save more lives.Mass ShootingsNotes

Various studies adopt different terminology for mass shooting events that occur in public locations and in which victims are selected indiscriminately. Because most of the studies described in this report use the term mass public shooting (as opposed to public mass shooting, for example), when referring to these types of events, we use that term.Return to content ⤴
Similar definitional issues exist in the study of school shootings. For further discussion specific to school shootings, see Elsass, Schildkraut, and Stafford (2016) and Levine and McKnight (2020).Return to content ⤴
There are other definitional issues around what constitutes a mass shooting incident that we do not discuss fully here. Namely, a mass shooting incident and its associated casualties are typically delineated as a shooting of multiple victims simultaneously or over a relatively short period of time and in close geographic proximity. However, in most existing data sets (Table 1), there is ambiguity over what constitutes a relatively short period of time or close geographic proximity. Although the FBI has definitions to distinguish mass murder (one event, one location), spree murder (one event, two or more locations, without the offender "cooling off" emotionally between murders), and serial murder (separate events, with the offender "cooling off" emotionally between homicidal events), it is somewhat unclear the extent to which existing mass shooting databases differ in how they classify or count events based on time frame or geographic distance parameters. For further discussion, see Krouse and Richardson (2015).Return to content ⤴
As noted by Duwe (2020), some mass shooting incidents involve victims shot in both residential and public settings.Return to content ⤴
The National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS), though not commonly used in mass shooting studies, also contains information that could be used to assess mass shooting incidents. The NIBRS data feed into the SHR data system but contain substantially more information on incident characteristics. However, NIBRS data are only available starting in 1991 and do not currently have complete coverage of the United States. The number of participating jurisdictions also varies greatly over time, from almost all agencies in only three states in 1991 (Reaves, 1993), to 7,283 agencies in 42 states and Washington, D.C., in 2018 (FBI, 2019e). For a comparison of mass murders as captured by SHR and NIBRS data, see Huff-Corzine et al. (2014).Return to content ⤴
A noted limitation of the victim-offender relationship item in the SHR is that the variable is coded with respect to only the first victim listed, and the same code is applied to all victims (i.e., the victim-offender relationship is linked to the offender data; the same is true of weapon used and circumstance codes) (Fox and Swatt, 2009; Huff-Corzine et al., 2014). Thus, an incident in which an offender killed three members of his or her family and one stranger might be classified as a familicide or a mass public shooting depending on who is listed as the first victim in the SHR.Return to content ⤴
Missingness by jurisdiction in the SHR is commonly handled through a weighting process using the ratio of homicide counts in the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports to reported homicide counts in the SHR database in order to produce national or state-level estimates (Fox and Swatt, 2009). Several methods for imputing missing item data in the SHR have been developed and are discussed in detail in Wadsworth and Roberts (2008) and Roberts, Roberts, and Wadsworth (2018).Return to content ⤴
The stated purpose of the FBI active shooter reports is to provide federal, state, and local law enforcement with data to better understand how to prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from active shooter incidents; data collection methods used to inform the reports are described in Blair and Schweit (2014). Data cover the United States and come from multiple sources, including FBI reporting, official law enforcement investigative data, publicly available sources (e.g., governmental agency reports, journal articles), a comprehensive list of incidents developed by the New York City Police Department, and a study of shooting incidents in the United States from 2000 to 2010 conducted by the Advanced Law Enforcement Rapid Response Training Center.Return to content ⤴
As an example of this issue, the discontinued Stanford Mass Shootings in America database, which relied solely on online media sources to identify mass shooting events, cautioned its users that information in the database spanned a period in which reporting shifted from traditional media to digital media, and thus annual incident counts partially reflect changes in data collection methodology (see Stanford Geospatial Center, undated). Thus, the more than threefold surge in mass shooting incidents from 2014 to 2015 shown in the Stanford data likely reflects increased online reporting and not necessarily a true increase in the rate of mass shootings.Return to content ⤴
To illustrate how simple linear trend models of mass shootings are influenced by outliers, the estimated slope from a linear trend model of mass public shooting fatalities from 1999 to 2017 is 2.3 (standard error = 0.93); excluding the Las Vegas shooting, this slope is reduced to 1.3 (standard error = 0.73).Return to content ⤴
For comparison, general population studies tend to find the prevalence of diagnosable psychotic disorders (including schizophrenia, schizoaffective psychosis, bipolar disorder with accompanying delusion, substance-induced psychotic disorder, and delusional disorders) to be less than 1 percent, although the prevalence varies substantially as a function of the method of measurement and the population studied (see Moreno-Küstner, Martín, and Pastor, 2018). There are no benchmarks for prevalence that use the methods of post-incident diagnosis that are used with mass shooters.Return to content ⤴
The same study identified romantic or family issues (e.g., divorce, child custody dispute) as a potential contributing stressor or triggering event in 46 percent of familicides, 23 percent of mass public killings, and 4 percent of felony-related mass killings (Fridel, 2017).Return to content ⤴
Compared with homicides overall and with felony-related mass shootings, familicide mass shootings and mass public shootings are significantly more likely to end with the death of the perpetrator by suicide. Although estimates vary depending on the period of analysis, data source, and definitions applied, approximately 40 to 60 percent of mass public shooters died by suicide (Duwe, 2004, 2020; Lankford, 2015; Fridel, 2017). Estimates are comparable for familicide mass shootings or mass killings but are far lower (less than 5 percent) for felony-related mass shootings or mass killings (Duwe, 2004; Fridel, 2017).Return to content ⤴
There is no official classification of mass public shooting or shooter typologies, but researchers have often distinguished between workplace violence (disgruntled employee violence), school shootings, ideological extremism, and rampage shootings (i.e., generally, the shootings that do not fall in the other categories) (Duwe, 2004; Lankford, 2013; Capellan et al., 2019).Return to content ⤴
As discussed previously, different definitions of mass public shootings result in different temporal patterns. If mass public shootings are defined more narrowly as incidents with four or more victims killed, school shootings were very rare prior to the 1990s and constituted 11 percent of all mass public shootings from 1976 to 2018 (Duwe, 2020). Under the broader definition used by Capellan et al. (2019), 25 percent of mass public shootings from 1966 to 2017 occurred in schools. Return to content ⤴
The identification of "assault weapons" in these incidents is not straightforward, partly because the term assault weapon is controversial. In state and federal gun laws, the term generally refers to specific semiautomatic firearm models that are designed to fire a high volume of ammunition in a controlled way or that have specified design features, such as folding stocks or pistol grips. For further discussion, see Koper (2020) and Klarevas (2019).Return to content ⤴
This likely does not apply to felony-related mass shootings, in which the death of the perpetrator is uncommon.Return to content ⤴
For recent examples, see Klarevas, Conner, and Hemenway (2019) and Webster et al. (2020).Return to content ⤴
The distributional characteristics of mass shooting incidents are such that standard assumptions of asymptotic consistency and normality for the parameter estimates may not hold, thus threating the validity of effect estimates and associated statistical inferences.Return to content ⤴
For instance, it is common for studies evaluating the effects of gun policies on the likelihood of a mass shooting occurring to use two-way fixed-effects models that control for year and state fixed effects. In conventional estimation of these models, states that do not experience an incident over the study time frame do not enter the log-likelihood. In some studies of high-fatality mass public shootings, this applies to nearly half of the states in the sample.Return to content ⤴
There has also been some debate about the extent to which rates of gunfire attained in incidents of LCM use could be similarly attained with use of non-LCM weapons. For a summary of this discussion, see Koper (2020), p. 165, note 19.Return to content ⤴

Originally published March 2, 2018References

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller, “Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 105, No. 490, 2010, pp. 493–505.
Abutaleb, Yasmeen, and William Wan, “After Trump Blames Mental Illness for Mass Shootings, Health Agencies Ordered to Hold All Posts on Issue,” Washington Post, August 20, 2019.
Adler, W. C., F. M. Bielke, D. J. Doi, and J. F. Kennedy, Cops Under Fire: Law Enforcement Officers Killed with Assault Weapons or Guns with High Capacity, Washington, D.C.: Handgun Control, Inc., 1995.
Ahmedani, Brian K., Gregory E. Simon, Christine Stewart, Arne Beck, Beth E. Waitzfelder, Rebecca Rossom, Frances Lynch, Ashli Owen-Smith, Enid M. Hunkeler, Ursula Whiteside, Belinda H. Operskalski, M. Justin Coffey, and Leif I. Solberg, “Health Care Contacts in the Year Before Suicide Death,” Journal of General Internal Medicine, Vol. 29, No. 6, 2014, pp. 870–877.
Albert, Adelin, and John A. Anderson, “On the Existence of Maximum Likelihood Estimates in Logistic Regression Models,” Biometrika, Vol. 71, No. 1, 1984, pp. 1–10.
Alcorn, Ted, “Trends in Research Publications About Gun Violence in the United States, 1960 to 2014,” JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 177, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 124–126.
Alcorn, Ted, and Scott Burris, “Gun Violence Prevention,” Lancet, Vol. 388, No. 10041, 2016, p. 233.
Aldrich, John H., and Forrest D. Nelson, Linear Probability, Logit, and Probit Models, Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1984.
Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Regressive Sin Taxes, with an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 134, No. 3, 2019, pp. 1557–1626.
1971–2019,” GunPolicy.org, October 7, 2019.
Alpers, Philip, and Michael Picard, “Australia—Gun Facts, Figures and the Law,” GunPolicy.org, 2020.
American Law Institute, Model Penal Code, Section 2.02 cmt.at 238, 1985.
AmmoSpy, “Trending,” webpage, undated. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.ammospy.net/trending
Andersen, Ronald, Martin R. Frankel, and Judith Kasper, Total Survey Error: Applications to Improve Health Surveys, San Francisco, Calif.: Jossey-Bass, 1979.
Anderson, D. Mark, and Joseph J. Sabia, “Child-Access-Prevention Laws, Youths’ Gun Carrying, and School Shootings,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 61, No. 3, August 2018, pp. 489–524.
Andrés, Antonio Rodríguez, and Katherine Hempstead, “Gun Control and Suicide: The Impact of State Firearm Regulations in the United States, 1995–2004,” Health Policy, Vol. 101, No. 1, 2011, pp. 95–103.
Aneja, Abhay, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws and the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2011, pp. 565–631.
Aneja, Abhay, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang, The Impact of Right to Carry Laws and the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Law School, Olin Working Paper No. 461, December 1, 2014.
Anestis, M. D., “Prior Suicide Attempts Are Less Common in Suicide Decedents Who Died by Firearms Relative to Those Who Died by Other Means,” Journal of Affective Disorders, Vol. 189, No. 1, 2016, pp. 106–109.
Anestis, Michael D., and Joye C. Anestis, “Suicide Rates and State Laws Regulating Access and Exposure to Handguns,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 10, 2015, pp. 2049–2058.
Appleby, Louis, John A. Dennehy, Christopher S. Thomas, E. Brian Faragher, and Glyn Lewis, “Aftercare and Clinical Characteristics of People with Mental Illness Who Commit Suicide: A Case-Control Study,” Lancet, Vol. 353, No. 9162, 1999, pp. 1397–1400.
Arria, Amelia M., Emily R. Winick, Laura M. Garnier-Dykstra, Kathryn B. Vincent, Kimberly M. Caldeira, Holly C. Wilcox, and Kevin E. O’Grady, “Help Seeking and Mental Health Service Utilization Among College Students with a History of Suicide Ideation,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 62, No. 12, 2011, pp. 1510–1513.
Associated Press and USA Today, “Report: 2019 Records 41 Mass Killings in United States,” Tucson.com, December 28, 2019.
ATF—See Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Avraham, Jacob B., Spiros G. Frangos, and Charles J. DiMaggio, “The Epidemiology of Firearm Injuries Managed in US Emergency Departments,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 5, No. 38, 2018.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Nondiscretionary Concealed Weapons Laws: A Case Study of Statistics, Standards of Proof, and Public Policy,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 1, No. 1–2, January 1999, pp. 436–470.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 9336, November 2002.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003a, pp. 1193–1312.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “The Latest Misfires in Support of the 'More Guns, Less Crime' Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003b, pp. 1371–1398.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Yet Another Refutation of the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis—with Some Help from Moody and Marvell,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2009a, pp. 35–59.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “More Guns, Less Crime Fails Again: The Latest Evidence from 1977–2006,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 2, May 2009b, pp. 218–238.
Azrael, D., A. A. Braga, and M. E. O’Brien, Developing the Capacity to Understand and Prevent Homicide: An Evaluation of the Milwaukee Homicide Review Commission, Boston, Mass.: Harvard School of Public Health, 2013.
Azrael, Deborah, Joanna Cohen, Carmel Salhi, and Matthew Miller, “Firearm Storage in Gun-Owning Households with Children: Results of a 2015 National Survey,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018, pp. 295–304.
Azrael, Deborah, Philip J. Cook, and Matthew Miller, “State and Local Prevalence of Firearms Ownership Measurement, Structure, and Trends,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 20, No. 1, March 2004, pp. 43–62.
Azrael, Deborah, Lisa Hepburn, David Hemenway, and Matthew Miller, “The Stock and Flow of U.S. Firearms: Results from the 2015 National Firearms Survey,” Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 5, 2017, pp. 38–57.
Azrael, Deborah, and Matthew Miller, “Reducing Suicide Without Affecting Underlying Mental Health: Theoretical Underpinnings and a Review of the Evidence Base Lining the Availability of Lethal Means and Suicide,” in Rory C. O’Connor and Jane Pirkis, eds., The International Handbook of Suicide Prevention, 2nd ed., Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley and Sons, 2016.
Baekgaard, Martin, Julian Christensen, Casper Mondrup Dahlmann, Asbjørn Mathiasen, and Niels Bjørn Grund Petersen, “The Role of Evidence in Politics: Motivated Reasoning and Persuasion Among Politicians,” British Journal of Political Science, Vol. 49, No. 3, July 2019, pp. 1117–1140.
Bailey, J. E., A. L. Kellermann, G. W. Somes, J. G. Banton, F. P. Rivara, and N. P. Rushforth, “Risk Factors for Violent Death of Women in the Home,” Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 157, No. 7, 1997, pp. 777–782.
Baker, Jeanine, and Samara McPhedran, “Gun Laws and Sudden Death: Did the Australian Firearms Legislation of 1996 Make a Difference?” British Journal of Criminology, Vol. 47, No. 3, 2007, pp. 455–469.
Baker, Jeanine, and Samara McPhedran, “Australian Firearm Related Deaths: New Findings and Implications for Crime Prevention and Health Policies Following Revisions to Official Death Count Data,” International Journal of Criminal Justice Sciences, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2015, pp. 1–9.
Barati, Mehdi, “New Evidence on the Impact of Concealed Carry Weapon Laws on Crime,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 47, 2016, pp. 76–83.
Barber, Catherine, Deborah Azrael, Amy Cohen, Matthew Miller, Deonza Thymes, David Enze Wang, and David Hemenway, “Homicides by Police: Comparing Counts from the National Violent Death Reporting System, Vital Statistics, and Supplementary Homicide Reports,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 106, No. 5, May 2016, pp. 922–927.
Barber, Catherine, and David Hemenway, “Too Many or Too Few Unintentional Firearm Deaths in Official U.S. Mortality Data?” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 43, No. 3, 2011, pp. 724–731.
Barber, C., D. Hemenway, J. Hochstadt, and D. Azrael, “Underestimates of Unintentional Firearm Fatalities: Comparing Supplementary Homicide Report Data with the National Vital Statistics System,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2002, pp. 252–256.
Barkin, Shari L., Stacia A. Finch, Edward H. Ip, Benjamin Scheindlin, Joseph A. Craig, Jennifer Steffes, Victoria Weiley, Eric Slora, David Altman, and Richard C. Wasserman, “Is Office-Based Counseling About Media Use, Timeouts, and Firearm Storage Effective? Results from a Cluster-Randomized, Controlled Trial,” Pediatrics, Vol. 122, No. 1, 2008, pp. E15–E25.
Bartley, William Alan, and Mark A. Cohen, “The Effect of Concealed Weapons Laws: An Extreme Bound Analysis,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 36, No. 2, 1998, pp. 258–265.
Barton, M. S., “Gentrification and Violent Crime in New York City,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 62, No. 9, 2016, pp. 1180–1202.
Bartos, Bradley J., Richard McCleary, Lorraine Mazerolle, and Kelsy Luengen, “Controlling Gun Violence: Assessing the Impact of Australia’s Gun Buyback Program Using a Synthetic Control Group Experiment,” Prevention Science, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2020, pp. 131–136.
Bate, Roger, Cody Kallen, and Aparna Mathur, “The Perverse Effect of Sin Taxes: The Rise of Illicit White Cigarettes,” Applied Economics, Vol. 52, No. 8, 2020, pp. 789–805.
BBC Research & Consulting, The Economic Impacts of Hunting, Fishing and Wildlife Watching in Colorado, Denver, Colo., September 26, 2008.
Beard, T. Randolph, Paula A. Gant, and Richard P. Saba, “Border-Crossing Sales, Tax Avoidance, and State Tax Policies: An Application to Alcohol,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 64, No. 1, July 1997, pp. 293–306.
Beauchamp, Zack, “Australia Confiscated 650,000 Guns. Murders and Suicides Plummeted,” Vox, May 18, 2018.
Beekman, Daniel, “How Gun-Tax Legislation Would Affect Seattle Firearms Stores,” Seattle Times, July 29, 2015.
Beekman, Daniel, “Seattle’s Gun Tax Raised $93,000 Last Year,” Seattle Times, March 16, 2018.
Benson, Bruce L., and Brent D. Mast, “Privately Produced General Deterrence,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 725–746.
Berk, Richard A., and Susan B. Sorenson, “Algorithmic Approach to Forecasting Rare Violent Events: An Illustration Based in Intimate Partner Violence Perpetration,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 213–233.
Berrigan, John, Deborah Azrael, David Hemenway, and Matthew Miller, “Firearms Training and Storage Practices Among US Gun Owners: A Nationally Representative Study,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 25, Supp. 1, 2019, pp. i31–i38.
Betz, M. E., C. Barber, and M. Miller, “Suicidal Behavior and Firearm Access: Results from the Second Injury Control and Risk Survey,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 41, No. 4, 2011, pp. 384–391.
Betz, M. E., M. Miller, C. Barber, B. Beaty, I. Miller, C. A. Camargo, Jr., and E. D. Boudreaux, “Lethal Means Access and Assessment Among Suicidal Emergency Department Patients,” Depression and Anxiety, Vol. 33, No. 6, 2016, pp. 502–511.
Bichler, G., A. Norris, J. R. Dmello, and J. Randle, “The Impact of Civil Gang Injunctions on Networked Violence Between the Bloods and the Crips,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 65, No. 7, 2019, pp. 875–915.
Bichler, Gisela, Karin Schmerler, and Janet Enriquez, “Curbing Nuisance Motels: An Evaluation of Police as Place Regulators,” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and Management, Vol. 36, No. 2, 2013, pp. 437–462.
Bice, Douglas C., and David D. Hemley, “The Market for New Handguns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2002, pp. 251–265.
Birckmayer, J., and D. Hemenway, “Suicide and Firearm Prevalence: Are Youth Disproportionately Affected?” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 31, No. 3, 2001, pp. 303–310.
Black, Dan A., and Daniel S. Nagin, “Do Right-to-Carry Laws Deter Violent Crime?” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1998, pp. 209–219.
Blair, Janet M., Katherine A. Fowler, Shane P. D. Jack, and Alexander E. Crosby, “The National Violent Death Reporting System: Overview and Future Directions,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 22, Supp. 1, 2016, pp. i6–11.
Blair, J. Pete, and Katherine W. Schweit, A Study of Active Shooter Incidents, 2000–2013, Washington, D.C.: Texas State University and Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice, 2014.
Blattman, C., D. Green, D. Ortega, and S. Tobón, “Place-Based Interventions at Scale: The Direct and Spillover Effects of Policing and City Services on Crime,” BFI Working Paper, 2019.
Blau, Benjamin M., Devon H. Gorry, and Chip Wade, “Guns, Laws, and Public Shootings in the United States,” Applied Economics, Vol. 48, No. 49, 2016, pp. 4732–4746.
Bohnert, A. S., J. F. McCarthy, R. V. Ignacio, M. A. Ilgen, A. Eisenberg, and F. C. Blow, “Misclassification of Suicide Deaths: Examining the Psychiatric History of Overdose Decedents,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 6, 2013, pp. 326–330.
Booty, Marisa, Jayne O’Dwyer, Daniel Webster, Alex McCourt, and Cassandra Crifasi, “Describing a ‘Mass Shooting’: The Role of Databases in Understanding Burden,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2019, article 47.
Borowsky, I. W., M. D. Resnick, M. Ireland, and R. W. Blum, “Suicide Attempts Among American Indian and Alaska Native Youth: Risk and Protective Factors,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 153, No. 6, 1999, pp. 573–580.
Bose, Jonaki, Sarra L. Hedden, Rachel N. Lipari, and Eunice Park-Lee, Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Rockville, Md.: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, September 2018.
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, “About Brady,” webpage, undated. As of January 10, 2016: http://www.bradycampaign.org/about-brady
Braga, A. A., “Getting Deterrence Right: Evaluation Evidence and Complementary Crime Control Mechanisms,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 11, 2012, pp. 201–210.
Braga, Anthony A., “Guns and Crime,” in F. Parisi, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Law and Economics, Vol. 3: Public Law and Legal Institutions, New York: Oxford University Press, 2017, pp. 344–369.
Braga, A. A., D. Hureau, and L. Grossman, Managing Group Violence Reduction Strategies: The Value of Shooting Scorecards, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, 2014.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Hureau, and A. V. Papachristos, “An Ex Post Facto Evaluation Framework for Place-Based Police Interventions,” Evaluation Review, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2012, pp. 592–626.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Hureau, and A. V. Papachristos, “Deterring Gang-Involved Gun Violence: Measuring the Impact of Boston’s Operation Ceasefire on Street Gang Behavior,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 30, No. 1, 2014, pp. 113–139.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Hureau, and C. Winship, “Losing Faith? Police, Black Churches, and the Resurgence of Youth Violence in Boston,” Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, 2008.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Kennedy, E. J. Waring, and A. M. Piehl, “Problem-Oriented Policing, Deterrence, and Youth Violence: An Evaluation of Boston’s Operation Ceasefire,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 38, No. 3, 2001, pp. 195–225.
Braga, Anthony A., Andrew V. Papachristos, and David M. Hureau, “The Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 31, No. 4, 2014, pp. 633–663.
Braga, A. A., and G. L. Pierce, “Disrupting Illegal Firearms Markets in Boston: The Effects of Operation Ceasefire on the Supply of New Handguns to Criminals,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 4, 2005, pp. 717–748.
Braga, A. A., B. Turchan, and L. Barao, “The Influence of Investigative Resources on Homicide Clearances,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 35, No. 2, 2019, pp. 337–364.
Braga, Anthony A., and David L. Weisburd, “The Effects of Focused Deterrence Strategies on Crime: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 49, No. 3, 2012, pp. 323–358.
Braga, A. A., and D. L. Weisburd, “Must We Settle for Less Rigorous Evaluations in Large Area-Based Crime Prevention Programs? Lessons from a Campbell Review of Focused Deterrence,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2014, pp. 573–597.
Braga, Anthony A., David Weisburd, and Brandon Turchan, “Focused Deterrence Strategies and Crime Control: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Evidence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2018, pp. 205–250.
Braga, Anthony A., Garen J. Wintemute, Glenn L. Pierce, Philip J. Cook, and Greg Ridgeway, “Interpreting the Empirical Evidence on Illegal Gun Market Dynamics,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 89, No. 5, 2012, pp. 779–793.
Braga, A. A., G. Zimmerman, L. Barao, C. Farrell, R. K. Brunson, and A. V. Papachristos, “Street Gangs, Gun Violence, and Focused Deterrence: Comparing Place-Based and Group-Based Evaluation Methods to Estimate Direct and Spillover Deterrent Effects,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 56, No. 4, 2019, pp. 524–562.
Branas, C. C., T. S. Richmond, D. P. Culhane, T. R. Ten Have, and D. J. Wiebe, “Investigating the Link Between Gun Possession and Gun Assault,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 99, No. 11, 2009, pp. 2034–2040.
Brauer, Jurgen, Daniel Montolio, and Elisa Trujillo-Baute, “How Do US State Firearms Laws Affect Firearms Manufacturing Location? An Empirical Investigation, 1986–2010,” Journal of Economic Geography, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2017, pp. 753–790.
Brenan, Megan, “Most U.S. Teachers Oppose Carrying Guns in Schools,” Gallup, March 16, 2018.
Brent, D. A., M. Baugher, J. Bridge, T. H. Chen, and L. Chiappetta, “Suicide in Affectively Ill Adolescents: A Case-Control Study,” Journal of Affective Disorders, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1994, pp. 193–202.
Brent, D. A., M. Baugher, J. Bridge, T. H. Chen, and L. Chiappetta, “Age- and Sex-Related Risk Factors for Adolescent Suicide,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 38, No. 12, 1999, pp. 1497–1505.
Brent, D. A., J. A. Perper, C. J. Allman, G. M. Moritz, M. E. Wartella, and J. P. Zelenak, “The Presence and Accessibility of Firearms in the Homes of Adolescent Suicides: A Case-Control Study,” JAMA, Vol. 266, No. 21, 1991, pp. 2989–2995.
Brent, D. A., J. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, and C. Allman, “Suicide in Adolescents with No Apparent Psychopathology,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1993a, pp. 494–500.
Brent, D. A., J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, and C. Roth, “Firearms and Adolescent Suicide—A Community Case-Control Study,” American Journal of Diseases of Children, Vol. 147, No. 10, 1993b, pp. 1066–1071.
Bridges, F. Stephen, Kimberly M. Tatum, and Julie C. Kunselman, “Domestic Violence Statutes and Rates of Intimate Partner and Family Homicide,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2008, pp. 117–130.
Briggs, J. T., and A. Tabarrok, “Firearms and Suicides in U.S. States,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 37, 2014, pp. 180–188.
Britt, Chester L., Gary Kleck, and David J. Bordua, “A Reassessment of the D.C. Gun Law: Some Cautionary Notes on the Use of Interrupted Time Series Designs for Policy Impact Assessment,” Law and Society Review, Vol. 30, No. 2, 1996, pp. 361–380.
Bronars, Stephen G., and John R. Lott, Jr., “Criminal Deterrence, Geographic Spillovers, and the Right to Carry Concealed Handguns,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, 1998, pp. 475–479.
Brunson, R. K., A. A. Braga, D. M. Hureau, and K. Pegram, “We Trust You, but Not That Much: Examining Police-Black Clergy Partnerships to Reduce Youth Violence,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2013, pp. 1006–1036.
Buchanan, Larry, Josh Keller, Richard A. Oppel, Jr., and Daniel Victor, “How They Got Their Guns,” New York Times, June 12, 2016.
Buchanan, Larry, Josh Keller, Richard A. Oppel, Jr., and Daniel Victor, “How They Got Their Guns,” New York Times, February 14, 2018.
Bukstein, O. G., D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, C. Roth, and L. Balach, “Risk Factors for Completed Suicide Among Adolescents with a Lifetime History of Substance Abuse: A Case-Control Study,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Vol. 88, No. 6, 1993, pp. 403–408.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Crime Gun Trace Analysis Reports: The Illegal Youth Firearms Market in Seventeen Communities, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1997.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Crime Gun Trace Reports (2000): Memphis, Tennessee, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 2002.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, 2012 Summary: Firearms Reported Lost and Stolen, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2013.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, FFL Thefts/Losses: January 1, 2015–December 31, 2015, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016a.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Firearms Commerce in the United States: Annual Statistical Update 2016, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016b.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Annual Firearms Manufacturing and Export Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, January 27, 2017.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Firearms Commerce in the United States: Annual Statistical Update 2018, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2018.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) Theft/Loss Report: January 1, 2018–December 31, 2018, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2019.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, “Fact Sheet—Facts and Figures for Fiscal Year 2018,” May 2019a. As of March 27, 2020: https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/fact-sheet/fact-sheet-facts-and-figures-fiscal-year-2018
Bureau of Justice Statistics, “National Crime Statistics Exchange: Powering the Transition to NIBRS,” webpage, undated. As of September 6, 2019: https://www.bjs.gov/content/ncsx.cfm
Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Data Collection: National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS),” webpage, 2017a. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=301
Bureau of Justice Statistics, “NCVS Redesign: Subnational,” webpage, 2017b. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=911
Burnham, Kenneth P., and David R. Anderson, “Multimodel Inference: Understanding AIC and BIC in Model Selection,” Sociological Methods and Research, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2004, pp. 261–304.
Butkus, Renee, and Arlene Weissman, “Internists’ Attitudes Toward Prevention of Firearm Injury,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 160, No. 12, 2014, pp. 821–827.
Butts, J. A., C. G. Roman, L. Bostwick, and J. R. Porter, “Cure Violence: A Public Health Model to Reduce Gun Violence,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 36, 2015, pp. 39–53.
Cabrera, Joseph F., and Roy Kwon, “Income Inequality, Household Income, and Mass Shooting in the United States,” Frontiers in Public Health, Vol. 6, October 2018, article 294.
Cai, Weiyi, and Jugal K. Patel, “A Half-Century of School Shootings Like Columbine, Sandy Hook and Parkland,” New York Times, May 11, 2019.
Cagle, M. Christine, and J. Michael Martinez, “Have Gun, Will Travel: The Dispute Between the CDC and the NRA on Firearm Violence as a Public Health Problem,” Politics & Policy, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2004, pp. 278–310.
Caldwell, B., “Criminalizing Day-to-Day Life: A Socio-Legal Critique of Gang Injunctions,” American Journal of Criminal Law, Vol. 37, No. 3, 2009, pp. 241–290.
California Department of Justice, “General Notice of Firearm Prohibition and Power of Attorney for Firearms Relinquishment, Sale, or Transfer for Storage,” BOF 110, October 2015.
Callahan, Molly, “The Story Behind the Data on Mass Murder in the United States,” Northeastern University, August 13, 2019.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90, No. 3, 2008, pp. 414–427.
Campbell Collaboration, Guidelines for Preparation of Review Protocols, Version 1.0, Oslo, Norway, January 1, 2001.
Campbell, Jacquelyn C., Nancy Glass, Phyllis W. Sharps, Kathryn Laughon, and Tina Bloom, “Intimate Partner Homicide: Review and Implications of Research and Policy,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2007, pp. 246–269.
Campbell, J. C., D. Webster, J. Kozio-McLain, C. Block, D. Campbell, M. A. Curry, F. Gary, N. Glass, J. McFarlane, C. Sachs, P. Sharps, Y. Ulrich, S. A. Wilt, J. Manganello, X. Xu, J. Schollenberger, V. Frye, and K. Laughon, “Risk Factors for Femicide in Abusive Relationships: Results from a Multisite Case Control Study,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 93, No. 7, 2003, pp. 1089–1097.
Campbell, Sean, and Daniel Nass, “The CDC’s Gun Injury Data Is Becoming Even Less Reliable,” FiveThirtyEight, March 11, 2019.
Campbell, Sean, Daniel Nass, and Mai Nguyen, “The CDC Is Publishing Unreliable Data on Gun Injuries. People Are Using It Anyway,” FiveThirtyEight, October 4, 2018.
Cantor, D., “Substantive Implications of Longitudinal Design Features: The National Crime Survey as a Case Study,” in D. Kasprzyk, G. Duncan, G. Kalton, and M. P. Singh, eds., Panel Surveys, New York: John Wiley, 1989, pp. 25–51.
Capellan, Joel Alfredo, and Alexei Anisin, “A Distinction Without a Difference? Examining the Causal Pathways Behind Ideologically Motivated Mass Public Shootings,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2018, pp. 235–255.
Capellan, Joel A., and SimonPeter Gomez, “Change and Stability in Offender, Behaviours, and Incident‐Level Characteristics of Mass Public Shootings in the United States, 1984–2015,” Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2018, pp. 51–72.
Capellan, Joel A., and Allan Y. Jiao, Deconstructing Mass Public Shootings: Exploring Opportunities for Intervention, Albany, N.Y.: Rockefeller Institute of Government, October 2019.
Capellan, Joel A., Joseph Johnson, Jeremy R. Porter, and Christine Martin, “Disaggregating Mass Public Shootings: A Comparative Analysis of Disgruntled Employee, School, Ideologically Motivated, and Rampage Shooters,” Journal of Forensic Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 3, 2019, pp. 814–823.
Carbone, Paul S., Conrad J. Clemens, and Thomas M. Ball, “Effectiveness of Gun-Safety Counseling and a Gun Lock Giveaway in a Hispanic Community,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 159, No. 11, 2005, pp. 1049–1054.
Carter, David L., Homicide Process Mapping: Best Practices for Increasing Homicide Clearances, Tallahassee, Fla.: Institute for Intergovernmental Research, 2013.
Cavanagh, J. T. O., A. J. Carson, M. Sharpe, and S. M. Lawrie, “Psychological Autopsy Studies of Suicide: A Systematic Review,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 33, No. 3, 2003, pp. 395–405.
Cavanaugh, Joseph E., “Unifying the Derivations for the Akaike and Corrected Akaike Information Criteria,” Statistics and Probability Letters, Vol. 33, No. 2, April 1997, pp. 201–208.
Cave, Anthony, “Instead of Buying New Ammunition, These Gun Enthusiasts Recycle,” WAMU: American University Radio, March 5, 2019.
CDC—See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, WONDER data system, undated. As of March 8, 2017: https://wonder.cdc.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Underlying Cause of Death, 1999–2017,” WONDER data system, undated-a. As of July 6, 2019: http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Source of Firearms Used by Students in School-Associated Violent Deaths—United States, 1992–1999,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 50, No. 31, 2001, pp. 657–660.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports, 2001–2014,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., March 28, 2013. As of March 9, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National and Regional, 1999–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., June 24, 2015. As of March 23, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate10_us.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National, Regional, and State 1981–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017a. As of May 8, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Leading Causes of Death Reports, National and Regional, 1999–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017b. As of May 10, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/leadcaus10_us.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports: 2001–2014,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017c. As of January 15, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National, Regional, and State, 1981–2017,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2019a. As of July 9, 2019: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports, 2000–2017,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., January 18, 2019b. As of July 26, 2019: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “WISQARS: Web-Based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System,” web tool, last updated July 1, 2020. As of December 11, 2020: http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars
Chaloupka, Frank J., Lisa M. Powell, and Kenneth E. Warner, “The Use of Excise Taxes to Reduce Tobacco, Alcohol, and Sugary Beverage Consumption,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 40, April 2019, pp. 187–201.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Ayda Yurekli, and Geoffrey T. Fong, “Tobacco Taxes as a Tobacco Control Strategy,” Tobacco Control, Vol. 21, No. 2, 2012, pp. 172–180.
Chang, Ailsa, “Why the AR-15 Is More Than Just a Gun,” NPR, June 24, 2013.
Chapman, S., P. Alpers, K. Agho, and M. Jones, “Australia’s 1996 Gun Law Reforms: Faster Falls in Firearm Deaths, Firearm Suicides, and a Decade Without Mass Shootings,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 6, 2006, pp. 365–372.
Chapman, Simon, Philip Alpers, and Michael Jones, “Association Between Gun Law Reforms and Intentional Firearm Deaths in Australia, 1979–2013,” JAMA, Vol. 316, No. 3, 2016, pp. 291–299.
Chapman, S., M. Stewart, P. Alpers, and M. Jones, “Fatal Firearm Incidents Before and After Australia’s 1996 National Firearms Agreement Banning Semiautomatic Rifles,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 169, No. 1, 2018, pp. 62–64.
Chaudri, V., and J. Geanakoplos, “A Note on the Economic Rationalization of Gun Control,” Economics Letters, Vol. 58, No. 1, 1998, pp. 51–53.
Chauhan, P., M. Cerda, S. F. Messner, M. Tracy, K. Tardiff, and S. Galea, “Race/Ethnic-Specific Homicide Rates in New York City: Evaluating the Impact of Broken Windows Policing and Crack Cocaine Markets,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2011, pp. 268–290.
Cheng, Cheng, and Mark Hoekstra, “Does Strengthening Self-Defense Law Deter Crime or Escalate Violence? Evidence from Expansions to Castle Doctrine,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 48, No. 3, 2013, pp. 821–853.
Cherney, Samantha, Andrew R. Morral, and Terry L. Schell, RAND State Firearm Law Database, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, TL-283-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL283.html
Cherney, Samantha, Andrew R. Morral, Terry L. Schell, and Sierra Smucker, RAND State Firearm Law Database, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, TL-283-1-RC, 2019. As of October 14, 2019: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL283-1.html
Chesney, Edward, Guy M. Goodwin, and Seena Fazel, “Risks of All‐Cause and Suicide Mortality in Mental Disorders: A Meta‐Review,” World Psychiatry, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2014, pp. 153–160.
Chesnut, Kelsie Y., Melissa Barragan, Jason Gravel, Natalie A. Pifer, Keramet Reiter, Nicole Sherman, and George E. Tita, “Not an ‘Iron Pipeline,’ but Many Capillaries: Regulating Passive Transactions in Los Angeles’ Secondary, Illegal Gun Market,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2017, pp. 226–231.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 4, 2009, pp. 1145–1177.
Choe, J. Y., L. A. Teplin, and K. M. Abram, “Perpetration of Violence, Violent Victimization, and Severe Mental Illness: Balancing Public Health Outcomes,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 2, 2008, pp. 153–164.
Coben, J. H., C. A. Steiner, M. Barrett, C. T. Merrill, and D. Adamson, “Completeness of Cause of Injury Coding in Healthcare Administrative Databases in the United States,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2001, pp. 199–201.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 27, Section 478.11, Meaning of Terms.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 28, Section 25.9, Retention and Destruction of Records in the System.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 38, Section 1.218, Security and Law Enforcement at VA Facilities.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 39, Section 232.1, Conduct on Postal Property.
Cohen, Amy P., Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Rate of Mass Shootings Has Tripled Since 2011, Harvard Research Shows,” Mother Jones, October 15, 2014.
Cohn, Scott, “Remington Rifle Settlement, Including Free Trigger Replacement, Is Official,” CNBC, October 24, 2018.
Cole, David, “Mandatory Firearms Training? What If We Had Mandatory Free Speech Training,” Ammoland: Shooting Sports News, June 13, 2014.
Collazos, D., E. García, D. Mejía, D. Ortega, and S. Tobón, “Hot Spots Policing in a High Crime Environment: An Experimental Evaluation in Medellín,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, February 2020.
Collins, T., R. Greenberg, M. Siegel, Z. Xuan, E. F. Rothman, S. W. Cronin, and D. Hemenway, “State Firearm Laws and Interstate Transfer of Guns in the USA, 2006–2016,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, June 2018, pp. 322–336.
Colquhoun, D., “An Investigation of the False Discovery Rate and the Misinterpretation of p-Values,” Royal Society Open Science, Vol. 1, No. 3, 2014.
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Taber, “Inference with ‘Difference in Differences’ with a Small Number of Policy Changes,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93, No. 1, 2011, pp. 113–125.
Conner, Andrew, Deborah Azrael, Vivian H. Lyons, Catherine Barber, and Matthew Miller, “Validating the National Violent Death Reporting System as a Source of Data on Fatal Shootings of Civilians by Law Enforcement Officers,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 109, No. 4, 2019, pp. 578–584.
Conner, Andrew, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Suicide Case-Fatality Rates in the United States, 2007 to 2014: A Nationwide Population-Based Study,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 171, No. 12, 2019, pp. 885–895.
Conwell, Y., P. R. Duberstein, K. Connor, S. Eberly, C. Cox, and E. D. Caine, “Access to Firearms and Risk for Suicide in Middle-Aged and Older Adults,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2002, pp. 407–416.
Cook, Philip J., “The Saturday Night Special: An Assessment of Alternative Definitions from a Policy Perspective,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 72, No. 4, 1981, pp. 1735–1745.
Cook, Philip J., “The Influence of Gun Availability on Violent Crime Patterns,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 4, 1983, pp. 49–89.
Cook, Philip J., “The Case of the Missing Victims: Gunshot Woundings in the National Crime Survey,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 91–102.
Cook, Philip J., “The Great American Gun War: Notes from Four Decades in the Trenches,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 42, No. 1, 2013, pp. 19–73.
Cook, Philip J., and Anthony A. Braga, “Comprehensive Firearms Tracing: Strategic and Investigative Uses of New Data on Firearms Markets,” Arizona Law Review, Vol. 43, No. 2, 2001, pp. 277–309.
Cook, P. J., A. A. Braga, B. S. Turchan, and L. M. Barao, “Why Do Gun Murders Have a Higher Clearance Rate Than Gunshot Assaults?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 18, No. 3, 2019, pp. 525–551.
Cook, Philip J., and Kristin A. Goss, The Gun Debate: What Everyone Needs to Know, New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.
Cook, P. J., and J. A. Leitzel, “‘Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy’: An Economic Analysis of the Attack on Gun Control,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 59, No. 1, 1996, pp. 91–118.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: Results of a Comprehensive National Survey on Firearms Ownership and Use, Washington, D.C.: Police Foundation, 1996.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: National Survey on Private Ownership and Use of Firearms: Research in Brief, Rockville, Md.: National Institute of Justice, 1997.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “Defensive Gun Uses: New Evidence from a National Survey,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 14, No. 2, 1998, pp. 111–131.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “The Effect of the Brady Act on Gun Violence,” in B. Harcourt, ed., Guns, Crime, and Punishment in America, New York: New York University Press, 2003, pp. 283–298.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “The Social Costs of Gun Ownership,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90, No. 1–2, 2006, pp. 379–391.
Cook, P. J., and J. Ludwig, “Policing Guns: Why Gun Violence Is Not (Just) a Public Health Problem,” Items: Insights from the Social Sciences, November 6, 2018.
Cook, Philip J., J. Ludwig, and A. A. Braga, “Criminal Records of Homicide Offenders,” JAMA, Vol. 294, No. 5, 2005, pp. 598–601.
Cook, Philip J., Jens Ludwig, and David Hemenway, “The Gun Debate’s New Mythical Number: How Many Defensive Uses Per Year?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 16, No. 3, 1997, pp. 463–469.
Cook, P. J., J. Ludwig, S. Venkatesh, and A. A. Braga, “Underground Gun Markets,” Economic Journal, Vol. 117, 2007, pp. F558–F888.
Cook, Philip J., Stephanie Molliconi, and Thomas B. Cole, “Regulating Gun Markets,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 86, No. 1, 1995, pp. 59–92.
Cook, Philip J., Susan T. Parker, and Harold A. Pollack, “Sources of Guns to Dangerous People: What We Learn by Asking Them,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015, pp. 28–36.
Cook, P. J., and H. A. Pollack, “Reducing Access to Guns by Violent Offenders,” presented at RSF Journal Conference: The Underground Gun Market, April 2016.
Cook, Philip J., and Harold A. Pollack, “Reducing Access to Guns by Violent Offenders,” Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 5, October 2017, pp. 2–36.
Cook, Philip J., Harold A. Pollack, and Kailey White, Results of the Chicago Inmate Survey of Gun Access and Use, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Crime Lab, January 2018.
Cook, P. J., H. A. Pollack, and K. White, “The Last Link: From Gun Acquisition to Criminal Use,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 96, No. 5, 2019, pp. 784–791.
Cook, Philip J., Ariadne E. Rivera-Aguirre, Magdalena Cerdá, and Garen Wintemute, “Constant Lethality of Gunshot Injuries from Firearm Assault: United States, 2003–2012,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 8, 2017, pp. 1324–1328.
Cooper, Alexia, and Erica L. Smith, Homicide Trends in the United States 1980–2008, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, November 2011.
Cordner, G., and E. P. Biebel, “Problem‐Oriented Policing in Practice,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 2, 2005, pp. 155–180.
Corrigan, P. W., and A. C. Watson, “Findings from the National Comorbidity Survey on the Frequency of Violent Behavior in Individuals with Psychiatric Disorders,” Psychiatry Research, Vol. 136, 2005, pp. 153–162.
Corsaro, N., “More Than Lightning in a Bottle and Far from Ready-Made,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2018, pp. 251–259.
Cox, D. R., and E. J. Snell, Analysis of Binary Data, 2nd ed., New York: Chapman and Hall, 1989.
Cox, Georgina R., Christabel Owens, Jo Robinson, Angela Nicholas, Anne Lockley, Michelle Williamson, Yee Tak Derek Cheung, and Jane Pirkis, “Interventions to Reduce Suicides at Suicide Hotspots: A Systematic Review,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 13, 2013.
Crafton, R. Eliot, Jane G. Gravelle, and William J. Krouse, Guns, Excise Taxes, Wildlife Restoration, and the National Firearms Act, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R45123, March 5, 2018.
Cramer, Clayton E., “Why the FBI’s Justifiable Homicide Statistics Are a Misleading Measure of Defensive Gun Use,” University of Florida Journal of Law and Public Policy, Vol. 27, 2016, pp. 505–514.
Cramer, Clayton E., and David B. Kopel, “‘Shall Issue’: The New Wave of Concealed Handgun Permit Laws,” Tennessee Law Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, 2005, pp. 679–757.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Mitchell L. Doucette, Emma E. McGinty, Daniel W. Webster, and Colleen L. Barry, “Storage Practices of US Gun Owners in 2016,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 108, No. 4, 2018a, pp. 532–537.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Alexander D. McCourt, Marisa D. Booty, and Daniel W. Webster, “Policies to Prevent Illegal Acquisition of Firearms: Impacts on Diversions of Guns for Criminal Use, Violence, and Suicide,” Current Epidemiology Reports, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2019, pp. 238–247.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Molly Merrill-Francis, Alex McCourt, Jon S. Vernick, Garen J. Wintemute, and Daniel W. Webster, “Association Between Firearm Laws and Homicide in Urban Counties,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018b, pp. 383–390.
Crifasi, C. K., J. S. Meyers, J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Effects of Changes in Permit-to-Purchase Handgun Laws in Connecticut and Missouri on Suicide Rates,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015, pp. 43–49.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Keshia M. Pollack, and Daniel W. Webster, “Effects of State-Level Policy Changes on Homicide and Nonfatal Shootings of Law Enforcement Officers,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2016, pp. 274–278.
Crime Prevention Research Center, “Updated: More Misleading Information from Bloomberg’s Everytown for Gun Safety on Guns: ‘Analysis of Recent Mass Shootings,’ Showing How Mass Public Shootings Keep Occurring in Gun-Free Zones,” September 1, 2014.
Crime Prevention Research Center, “Updated: Mass Public Shootings Keep Occurring in Gun-Free Zones: 94% of Attacks Since 1950,” June 15, 2018a.
Crime Prevention Research Center, “States That Allow Teachers and School Staff to Carry Guns,” October 9, 2018b.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Operations 2013, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2014.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Operations 2014, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2015.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, “National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section Active Records in the NICS Indices,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, December 31, 2016.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, “National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section: Active Records in the NICS Indices as of December 31, 2018,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, December 31, 2018.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section: 2018 Operations Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2019.
Csere, M., State Comparison of Gun Permit Fees, Hartford, Conn.: Connecticut General Assembly, Office of Legislative Research, OLR Research Report 2013-R-0048, 2013.
Cummings, P., D. C. Grossman, F. P. Rivara, and T. D. Koepsell, “State Gun Safe Storage Laws and Child Mortality Due to Firearms,” JAMA, Vol. 278, No. 13, 1997a, pp. 1084–1086.
Cummings, P., T. D. Koepsell, D. C. Grossman, J. Savarino, and R. S. Thompson, “The Association Between the Purchase of a Handgun and Homicide or Suicide,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 87, No. 6, 1997b, pp. 974–978.
Curtin, Sally C., Margaret Warner, and Holly Hedegaard, Suicide Rates for Females and Males by Race and Ethnicity: United States, 1999 and 2014, Atlanta, Ga.: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016.
Czyz, Ewa K., Adam G. Horwitz, Daniel Eisenberg, Anne Kramer, and Cheryl A. King, “Self-Reported Barriers to Professional Help Seeking Among College Students at Elevated Risk for Suicide,” Journal of American College Health, Vol. 61, No. 7, 2013, pp. 398–406.
Dahlberg, L. L., R. M. Ikeda, and M. J. Kresnow, “Guns in the Home and Risk of a Violent Death in the Home: Findings from a National Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 160, No. 10, 2004, pp. 929–936.
Daigle, M. S., “Suicide Prevention Through Means Restriction: Assessing the Risk of Substitution—A Critical Review,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 37, 2005, pp. 625–632.
de Jager, Elzerie, Eric Goralnick, Justin C. McCarty, Zain G. Hashmi, Molly P. Jarman, and Adil H. Haider, “Lethality of Civilian Active Shooter Incidents With and Without Semiautomatic Rifles in the United States,” JAMA, Vol. 320, No. 10, 2018, pp. 1034–1035.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Feng Liu, “Excise Tax Avoidance: The Case of State Cigarette Taxes,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2013, pp. 1130–1141.
Degeling, M., and B. Berendt, “What Is Wrong About Robocops as Consultants? A Technology-Centric Critique of Predictive Policing,” AI and Society, Vol. 33, No. 3, 2018, pp. 347–356.
Desai, R. A., D. Dausey, and R. A. Rosenheck, “Suicide Among Discharged Psychiatric Inpatients in the Department of Veterans Affairs,” Military Medicine, Vol. 173, No. 8, 2008, pp. 721–728.
DeSimone, Jeff, and Sara Markowitz, The Effect of Child Access Prevention Laws on Non-Fatal Gun Injuries, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 11613, September 2005.
DeSimone, J., S. Markowitz, and J. Xu, “Child Access Prevention Laws and Nonfatal Gun Injuries,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 80, No. 1, 2013, pp. 5–25.
Desmarais, S. L., R. A. Van Dorn, K. L. Johnson, K. J. Grimm, K. S. Douglas, and M. S. Swartz, “Community Violence Perpetration and Victimization Among Adults with Mental Illness,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, 2014, pp. 2342–2349.
Dezhbakhsh, Hashem, and Paul H. Rubin, “Lives Saved or Lives Lost? The Effects of Concealed-Handgun Laws on Crime,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, 1998, pp. 468–474.
Diamond, Peter A., “Consumption Externalities and Imperfect Corrective Pricing,” Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, Vol. 4, No. 2, 1973, pp. 526–538.
Dickey, Jay, and Mark Rosenberg, “How to Protect Gun Rights While Reducing the Toll of Gun Violence,” Washington Post, December 25, 2015.
Díez, Carolina, Rachel P. Kurland, Emily F. Rothman, Megan Bair-Merritt, Eric Fleegler, Ziming Xuan, Sandro Galea, Craig S. Ross, Bindu Kalesan, Kristin A. Goss, and Michael Siegel, “State Intimate Partner Violence–Related Firearm Laws and Intimate Partner Homicide Rates in the United States, 1991 to 2015,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 167, No. 8, 2017, pp. 536–543.
Dixon, L., “Dual Diagnosis of Substance Use in Schizophrenia: Prevalence and Impact on Outcomes,” Schizophrenia Research, Vol. 35, Supp. 1, 1999, pp. S93–S100.
Donohue, John J., “The Impact of Concealed Carry Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 287–341.
Donohue, John J., “Guns, Crime, and the Impact of State Right-to-Carry Laws,” Fordham Law Review, Vol. 73, No. 2, 2004, pp. 623–652.
Donohue, John J., “Laws Facilitating Gun Carrying and Homicide,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 12, 2017, pp. 1864–1865.
Donohue, John J., “More Gun Carrying, More Violent Crime,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2018, pp. 67–82.
Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data, the LASSO, and a State-Level Synthetic Controls Analysis, forthcoming.
Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data and a State-Level Synthetic Control Analysis, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 23510, November 2018.
Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, “Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data and a State-Level Synthetic Control Analysis,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2019, pp. 198–247.
Donohue, John J., and Steven D. Levitt, “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 2, 2001, pp. 379–420.
Doob, A. N., and C. M. Webster, “Sentence Severity and Crime: Accepting the Null Hypothesis,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 30, 2003, pp. 143–195.
Draper, Norman R., and Harry Smith, Applied Regression Analysis, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
Duda, M. D., and K. C. Young, Factors Related to Hunting and Fishing Participation in the United States, Harrisonburg, Va.: Responsive Management, report for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Grant # 14–48-0009–92-1252, 1993.
Duggan, Mark, “More Guns, More Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, No. 5, 2001, pp. 1086–1114.
Duggan, Mark, “Guns and Suicide,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 41–73.
Duggan, Mark, Randi Hjalmarsson, and Brian A. Jacob, “The Short-Term and Localized Effect of Gun Shows: Evidence from California and Texas,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93, No. 3, 2011, pp. 786–799.
Duncan, O. D., As Compared to What? Offensive and Defensive Gun Use Surveys, 1973–1994, Rockville, Md.: National Institute of Justice, working paper 185056, 2000a.
Duncan, O. D., “Gun Use Surveys: In Numbers We Trust?” Criminologist, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2000b, pp. 1–6.
Durlauf, S. N., and D. S. Nagin, “Imprisonment and Crime: Can Both Be Reduced?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2011, pp. 13–54.
Durlauf, Steven, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers, “Model Uncertainty and the Effect of Shall-Issue Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime,” European Economic Review, Vol. 81, 2016, pp. 32–67.
Duwe, Grant, “Body-Count Journalism: The Presentation of Mass Murder in the News Media,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 4, No. 4, 2000, pp. 364–399.
Duwe, Grant, “The Patterns and Prevalence of Mass Murder in Twentieth-Century America,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 4, 2004, pp. 729–761.
Duwe, Grant, “The Patterns and Prevalence of Mass Public Shootings in the United States, 1915–2013,” in Laura C. Wilson, ed., The Wiley Handbook of the Psychology of Mass Shootings, West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley and Sons, 2017, pp. 20–35.
Duwe, Grant, “Patterns and Prevalence of Lethal Mass Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 17–35.
Duwe, Grant, Tomislav Kovandzic, and Carlisle E. Moody, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Concealed Firearm Laws on Mass Public Shootings,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2002, pp. 271–296.
Eck, J. E., and W. Spelman, “Who Ya Gonna Call? The Police as Problem-Busters,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 33, No. 1, 1987, pp. 31–52.
Edwards, Griffin, Erik Nesson, Joshua J. Robinson, and Fredrick Vars, “Looking Down the Barrel of a Loaded Gun: The Effect of Mandatory Handgun Purchase Delays on Homicide and Suicide,” Economic Journal, Vol. 128, No. 616, 2018, pp. 3117–3140.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Tetsuya Saito, “Taxing Guns vs. Taxing Crime: An Application of the ‘Market for Offenses Model,’” Journal of Policy Modeling, Vol. 32, No. 5, 2010, pp. 670–689.
Elbogen, Eric B., and Sally C. Johnson, “The Intricate Link Between Violence and Mental Disorder: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 66, No. 2, February 2009, pp. 152–161.
Elder, Randy W., Briana Lawrence, Aneeqah Ferguson, Timothy S. Naimi, Robert D. Brewer, Sajal K. Chattopadhyay, Traci L. Toomey, Jonathan E. Fielding, and Task Force on Community Preventive Services, “The Effectiveness of Tax Policy Interventions for Reducing Excessive Alcohol Consumption and Related Harms,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 38, No. 2, 2010, pp. 217–229.
Elsass, H. Jaymi, Jaclyn Schildkraut, and Mark C. Stafford, “Studying School Shootings: Challenges and Considerations for Research,” American Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 41, No. 3, 2016, pp. 444–464.
Entman, Robert M., and Kimberly A. Gross, “Race to Judgment: Stereotyping Media and Criminal Defendants,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 71, No. 4, 2008, pp. 93–133.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Shoot First: "Stand Your Ground" Laws and Their Effect on Violent Crime and the Criminal Justice System, New York, 2013.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Innocents Lost: A Year of Unintentional Child Gun Deaths, June 2014.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Strategies for Reducing Gun Violence in American Cities, June 2016.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Be SMART,” webpage, 2017a. As of May 7, 2017: http://besmartforkids.org/
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Mass Shootings in the United States: 2009–2016,” April 11, 2017b.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Mass Shootings in the United States: 2009–2017,” December 6, 2018. As of May 15, 2019: http://everytownresearch.org/reports/mass-shootings-analysis/
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, "Ten Years of Mass Shootings in the United States: An Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund Analysis," November 21, 2019. As of June 22, 2020: https://everytownresearch.org/massshootingsreports/mass-shootings-in-america-2009-2019/
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Mayors Against Illegal Guns, and the National Urban League, Strategies for Reducing Gun Violence in American Cities, June 2016.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, National Education Association, and American Federation of Teachers, Keeping Our Schools Safe: A Plan to Stop Mass Shootings and End Gun Violence in American Schools, February 11, 2019.
Families Afield, An Initiative for the Future of Hunting, 2010.
Fay, Robert E., and Mamadou S. Diallo, Developmental Estimates of Subnational Crime Rates Based on the National Crime Victimization Survey, Washington, D.C.: Westat, 2015.
Fazel, Seena, Gautam G. Gulati, Louise Linsell, John R. Geddes, and Martin Grann, “Schizophrenia and Violence: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” PLoS Med, Vol. 6, No. 8, August 2009.
FBI—See Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Clearances," webpage, Crime in the United States 2013, 2012. As of April 2, 2020: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2013/crime-in-the-u.s.-2013/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/clearances/clearancetopic_final
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States: 2015, Uniform Crime Reporting Program, 2016a. As of March 8, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 8,” webpage, 2016b. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_8_murder_victims_by_weapon_2011-2015.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 15,” webpage, 2016c. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_15_justifiable_homicide_by_weapon_private_citizen_2011-2015.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 28,” webpage, 2016d. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/leoka/2015/tables/table_28_leos_fk_type_of_weapon_2006-2015.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Violent Crime,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016e. As of May 8, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/violent-crime/violentcrimemain_final.pdf
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Active Records in the NICS Index,” April 30, 2017. As of May 8, 2017: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/active_records_in_the_nics-index.pdf/view
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018a. As of August 1, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/topic-pages/expanded-homicide
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 8: Murder Victims, by Weapon, 2013–2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018b. As of May 13, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-8.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 15: Justifiable Homicide, by Weapon, Private Citizen, 2013–2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018c. As of May 13, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-15.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Table 1: Crime in the United States, by Volume and Rate per 100,000 Inhabitants, 1998–2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018d. As of August 1, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/table-1
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Table 16: Rate: Number of Crimes Per 100,000 Inhabitants, by Population Group, 2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018e. As of August 1, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/table-16
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 30 Questions and Answers About NIBRS Transition, Washington, D.C., October 2018f.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2016 and 2017, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2018g.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 3: Murder Offenders, by Age, Sex, Race, and Ethnicity, 2018,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2018, 2019a. As of November 18, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-3.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 14: Justifiable Homicide, by Weapon, Law Enforcement, 2014–2018,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2018, 2019b. As of November 18, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-14.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Federal Denials: Reasons Why the NICS Section Denies,” webpage, 2019c. As of May 9, 2019: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/federal_denials.pdf/view
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Table 28: Law Enforcement Officers Feloniously Killed, Type of Weapon, 2009–2018,” webpage, Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted, 2019d. As of May 13, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/leoka/2018/tables/table-28.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “2018 National Incident-Based Reporting System: Data Tables,” webpage, 2019e. As of June 19, 2020: https://ucr.fbi.gov/nibrs/2018/tables/data-tables
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2018, 2019f. As of June 19, 2020: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/topic-pages/expanded-homicide
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2018, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2019g.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2019, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2020.
Federal Commission on School Safety, Final Report of the Federal Commission on School Safety, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and U.S. Department of Homeland Security, December 18, 2018.
Finkelstein, Amy, “E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 3, 2009, pp. 969–1010.
Firearms News, homepage, undated. As of January 13, 2021: https://www.firearmsnews.com
Fjestad, S. P., Blue Book of Gun Values, 38th ed., Minneapolis, Minn.: Blue Book Publications, 2017.
Fleischer, Victor, “Curb Your Enthusiasm for Pigovian Taxes,” Vanderbilt Law Review, Vol. 68, No. 6, 2015, pp. 1673–1713.
Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “U.S. Mass Shootings, 1982–2017: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, June 14, 2017.
Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “US Mass Shootings, 1982–2019: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, August 31, 2019.
Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “US Mass Shootings, 1982–2020: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, February 26, 2020.
Fortunato, David, “Can Easing Concealed Carry Deter Crime?” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 96, No. 4, December 2015, pp. 1071–1085.
Fowler, Katherine A., Linda L. Dahlberg, Tadesse Haileyesus, Carmen Gutierrez, and Sarah Bacon, “Childhood Firearm Injuries in the United States,” Pediatrics, Vol. 140, No. 1, 2017.
Fox, A. M., and K. J. Novak, “Collaborating to Reduce Violence: The Impact of Focused Deterrence in Kansas City,” Police Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 3, 2018, pp. 283–308.
Fox, James Alan, “Missing Data Problems in the SHR: Imputing Offender and Relationship Characteristics,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2004, pp. 214–254.
Fox, James Alan, Uniform Crime Reports (United States): Supplementary Homicide Reports, 1976–1994, Boston, Mass.: Northeastern University, College of Criminal Justice, January 18, 2006.
Fox, James Alan, and Monica J. DeLateur, “Mass Shootings in America: Moving Beyond Newtown,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 125–145.
Fox, James A., and Emma E. Fridel, “The Tenuous Connections Involving Mass Shootings, Mental Illness, and Gun Laws,” Violence and Gender, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2016, pp. 14–19.
Fox, James Alan, and Jack Levin, “Multiple Homicide: Patterns of Serial and Mass Murder,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 23, 1998, pp. 407–455.
Fox, James A., and Jack Levin, Extreme Killing: Understanding Serial and Mass Murder, 3rd ed., Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications, 2015.
Fox, James Alan, and Marc L. Swatt, “Multiple Imputation of the Supplementary Homicide Reports, 1976–2005,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2009, pp. 51–77.
Franklin, Joseph C., Jessica D. Ribeiro, Kathryn R. Fox, Kate H. Bentley, Evan M. Kleiman, Xieyining Huang, Katherine M. Musacchio, Adam C. Jaroszweski, Bernard P. Chang, and Matthew K. Nock, “Risk Factors for Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors: A Meta-Analysis of 50 Years of Research,” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 143, No. 2, 2017, pp. 187–232.
Freed, L. H., D. W. Webster, J. J. Longwell, J. Carrese, and M. H. Wilson, “Factors Preventing Gun Acquisition and Carrying Among Incarcerated Adolescent Males,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 155, 2001, pp. 335–341.
Freedman, David A., “On the So-Called ‘Huber Sandwich Estimator’ and ‘Robust Standard Errors,’” American Statistician, Vol. 60, No. 4, 2006, pp. 299–302.
French, B., and P. J. Heagerty, “Analysis of Longitudinal Data to Evaluate a Policy Change,” Statistics in Medicine, Vol. 27, No. 24, 2008, pp. 5005–5025.
Fridel, Emma E., “A Multivariate Comparison of Family, Felony, and Public Mass Murders in the United States,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 36, No. 3–4, 2017, pp. 1092–1118.
Funk, T. Markus, “Gun Control and Economic Discrimination: The Melting-Point Case-in-Point,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 85, No. 3, 1995, pp. 764–806.
Gehrsitz, Markus, Henry Saffer, and Michael Grossman, The Effect of Changes in Alcohol Tax Differentials on Alcohol Consumption, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 27117, May 2020.
Gelman, Andrew, and John Carlin, “Beyond Power Calculations: Assessing Type S (Sign) and Type M (Magnitude) Errors,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, Vol. 9, No. 6, 2014, pp. 641–651.
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Assault Weapons,” webpage, undated-a. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/hardware-ammunition/assault-weapons/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Browse Gun Laws by State,” webpage, undated-b. As of November 10, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/search-gun-law-by-state/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Categories of Prohibited People,” webpage, undated-c. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/who-can-have-a-gun/categories-of-prohibited-people/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Guns in Schools,” webpage, undated-d. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/guns-in-schools/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Maintaining Records of Gun Sales,” webpage, undated-e. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/gun-sales/maintaining-records-of-gun-sales/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “‘Stand Your Ground’ Laws,” webpage, undated-f. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/stand-your-ground-laws/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Universal Background Checks,” webpage, undated-g. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/background-checks/universal-background-checks/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Waiting Periods,” webpage, undated-h. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/gun-sales/waiting-periods/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, "Location Restrictions," webpage, undated-i. As of January 27, 2020: https://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/location-restrictions
Gill, J. R., and M. Pasquale-Styles, “Firearm Deaths by Law Enforcement,” Journal of Forensic Science, Vol. 54, No. 1, 2009, pp. 185–188.
Gilmour, Stuart, Kittima Wattanakamolkul, and Maaya Kita Sugai, “The Effect of the Australian National Firearms Agreement on Suicide and Homicide Mortality, 1978–2015,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 108, No. 11, November 2018, pp. 1511–1516.
Ginwalla, Rashna, Peter Rhee, Randall Friese, Donald J. Green, Lynn Gries, Bellal Joseph, Narong Kulvatunyou, Dafney Lubin, Terence O’Keeffe, Gary Vercruysse, Julie Wynne, and Andrew Tang, “Repeal of the Concealed Weapons Law and Its Impact on Gun-Related Injuries and Deaths,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 76, No. 3, 2014, pp. 569–575.
Gius, Mark, “An Examination of the Effects of Concealed Weapons Laws and Assault Weapons Bans on State-Level Murder Rates,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 21, No. 4, 2014, pp. 265–267.
Gius, Mark, “The Effects of State and Federal Background Checks on State-Level Gun-Related Murder Rates,” Applied Economics, Vol. 47, No. 38, 2015a, pp. 4090–4101.
Gius, Mark, “The Impact of Minimum Age and Child Access Prevention Laws on Firearm-Related Youth Suicides and Unintentional Deaths,” Social Science Journal, Vol. 52, No. 2, 2015b, pp. 168–175.
Gius, Mark, “The Impact of State and Federal Assault Weapons Bans on Public Mass Shootings,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2015c, pp. 281–284.
Gius, Mark, “Effects of Permit-to-Purchase Laws on State-Level Firearm Murder Rates,” Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2017, pp. 73–80.
Gius, Mark, “The Effects of State and Federal Gun Control Laws on School Shootings,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 25, No. 5, 2018, pp. 317–320.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Spencer Glendon, “Who Owns Guns? Criminals, Victims, and the Culture of Violence,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, May 1998, pp. 458–462.
Glatt, K. M., “Helpline: Suicide Prevention at a Suicide Site,” Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior, Vol. 17, 1987, pp. 299–309.
Gold, Sharon L., “Why Are Victims of Domestic Violence Still Dying at the Hands of Their Abusers? Filling the Gap in State Domestic Violence Gun Laws,” Kentucky Law Journal, Vol. 91, No. 4, 2003, pp. 935–955.
Good, Phillip I., and James W. Hardin, Common Errors in Statistics (And How to Avoid Them), 4th ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
Goolsbee, Austan, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Joel Slemrod, “Playing with Fire: Cigarettes, Taxes, and Competition from the Internet,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2010, pp. 131–154.
Grambsch, P., “Regression to the Mean, Murder Rates, and Shall-Issue Laws,” American Statistician, Vol. 62, No. 4, 2008, pp. 289–295.
Grant, Bridget F., Frederick S. Stinson, Deborah A. Dawson, S. Patricia Chou, Mary C. Dufour, Wilson Compton, Roger P. Pickering, and Kenneth Kaplan, “Prevalence and Co-Occurrence of Substance Use Disorders and Independent Mood and Anxiety Disorders: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 61, No. 8, 2004, pp. 807–816.
Grassel, K. M., G. J. Wintemute, M. A. Wright, and M. P. Romero, “Association Between Handgun Purchase and Mortality from Firearm Injury,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2003, pp. 48–52.
Greenland, Sander, Mohammad Ali Mansournia, and Douglas G. Altman, “Sparse Data Bias: A Problem Hiding in Plain Sight,” BMJ, Vol. 353, 2016, pp. 1–6.
Grinshteyn, Erin, and David Hemenway, “Violent Death Rates: The US Compared with Other High-Income OECD Countries, 2010,” American Journal of Medicine, Vol. 129, No. 3, March 2016, pp. 266–273.
Groff, E. R., J. H. Ratcliffe, C. P. Haberman, E. T. Sorg, N. M. Joyce, and R. B. Taylor, “Does What Police Do at Hot Spots Matter? The Philadelphia Policing Tactics Experiment,” Criminology, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2015, pp. 21–53.
Grogger, J., “The Effects of Civil Gang Injunctions on Reported Violent Crime: Evidence from Los Angeles County,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2002, pp. 69–90.
Grossman, David C., Peter Cummings, Thomas D. Koepsell, Jean Marshall, Luann D’Ambrosio, Robert S. Thompson, and Chris Mack, “Firearm Safety Counseling in Primary Care Pediatrics: A Randomized, Controlled Trial,” Pediatrics, Vol. 106, No. 1, 2000, pp. 22–26.
Grossman, D. C., B. A. Mueller, C. Riedy, M. D. Dowd, A. Villaveces, J. Prodzinski, J. Nakagawara, J. Howard, N. Thiersch, and R. Harruff, “Gun Storage Practices and Risk of Youth Suicide and Unintentional Firearm Injuries,” JAMA, Vol. 293, No. 6, 2005, pp. 707–714.
Grossman, D. C., D. T. Reay, and S. A. Baker, “Self-Inflicted and Unintentional Firearm Injuries Among Children and Adolescents,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 153, No. 8, 1999, pp. 875–878.
Grossman, David C., Helen A. Stafford, Thomas D. Koepsell, Ryan Hill, Kyla D. Retzer, and Ward Jones, “Improving Firearm Storage in Alaska Native Villages: A Randomized Trial of Household Gun Cabinets,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 102, No. S2, 2012, pp. S291–S297.
Grossman, Richard S., and Stephen A. Lee, “May Issue Versus Shall Issue: Explaining the Pattern of Concealed-Carry Handgun Laws, 1960–2001,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2008, pp. 198–206.
Grunwald, B., and A. V. Papachristos, “Project Safe Neighborhoods in Chicago: Looking Back a Decade Later,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 107, No. 1, 2017, pp. 131–159.
Gu, Jackie, “Deadliest Mass Shootings Are Often Preceded by Violence at Home,” Bloomberg News, June 30, 2020.
Guettabi, Mouhcine, and Abdul Munasib, “Stand Your Ground Laws, Homicides and Gun Deaths,” Regional Studies, Vol. 52, No. 9, 2018, pp. 1250–1260.
Gun Violence Archive, homepage, undated-a. As of June 26, 2020: http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/
Gun Violence Archive, “Mass Shootings,” webpage, undated-b. As of October 25, 2017: http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/reports/mass-shooting
Hahn, Robert A., Oleg Bilukha, Alex Crosby, Mindy T. Fullilove, Akiva Liberman, Eve Moscicki, Susan Snyder, Farris Tuma, and Peter A. Briss, “Firearms Laws and the Reduction of Violence: A Systematic Review,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 28, No. 2, 2005, pp. 40–71.
Hamill, Mark E., Matthew C. Hernandez, Kent R. Bailey, Martin D. Zielinski, Miguel A. Matos, and Henry J. Schiller, “State Level Firearm Concealed-Carry Legislation and Rates of Homicide and Other Violent Crime,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons, Vol. 228, No. 1, 2019, pp. 1–8.
Hanlon, Thomas J., Catherine Barber, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Type of Firearm Used in Suicides: Findings from 13 States in the National Violent Death Reporting System, 2005–2015,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 65, No. 3, 2019, pp. 366–370.
Harlow, Caroline Wolf, Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities: Firearm Use by Offenders, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 189369, November 2001.
Harrell, Erika, Crime Against Persons with Disabilities, 2009–2015—Statistical Tables, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 250632, 2017.
HCUPnet: Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project, web tool, undated. As of October 18, 2019: https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project Fast Stats, “Opioid-Related Hospital Use,” web tool, April 2019. As of November 14, 2019: https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/faststats/OpioidUseServlet
Hedegaard, Holly, Sally C. Curtin, and Margaret Warner, “Suicide Mortality in the United States, 1999–2017,” National Center for Health Statistics Data Brief, No. 330, November 2018.
Helland, E., and A. Tabarrok, “Using Placebo Laws to Test ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2004.
Hemenway, David, “Survey Research and Self-Defense Gun Use: An Explanation of Extreme Overestimates,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 87, No. 4, 1997, pp. 1430–1445.
Hemenway, David, and Deborah Azrael, “The Relative Frequency of Offensive and Defensive Gun Uses: Results from a National Survey,” Violence and Victims, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2000, pp. 257–272.
Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, Andrew Conner, and Matthew Miller, “Variation in Rates of Fatal Police Shootings Across U.S. States: The Role of Firearm Availability,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 96, No. 1, 2019a, pp. 63–73.
Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Gun Use in the United States: Results from Two National Surveys,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2000, pp. 263–267.
Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Whose Guns Are Stolen? The Epidemiology of Gun Theft Victims,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2017, p. 11.
Hemenway, David, Steven Rausher, Pina Violano, Toby A. Raybould, and Catherine W. Barber, “Firearms Training: What Is Actually Taught?” Injury Prevention, Vol. 25, No. 2, 2019b, pp. 123–128.
Hemenway, David, and Sara J. Solnick, “Children and Unintentional Firearm Death,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 2, No. 26, 2015a.
Hemenway, David, and Sara J. Solnick, “The Epidemiology of Self-Defense Gun Use: Evidence from the National Crime Victimization Surveys 2007–2011,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015b, pp. 22–27.
Hemenway, David, Sara J. Solnick, and Deborah R. Azrael, “Firearm Training and Storage,” JAMA, Vol. 273, No. 1, 1995, pp. 46–50.
Hempstead, Katherine, and Antonio Rodríguez Andrés, Gun Control and Suicide: The Impact of State Firearm Regulations, 1995–2004, La Paz, Bolivia: Institute for Advanced Development Studies, Development Research Working Paper No. 17/2009, December 2009.
Hennigan, K. M., and D. Sloane, “Improving Civil Gang Injunctions: How Implementation Can Affect Gang Dynamics, Crime, and Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2013, pp. 7–41.
Hepburn, L., D. Azrael, M. Miller, and D. Hemenway, “The Effect of Child Access Prevention Laws on Unintentional Child Firearm Fatalities, 1979–2000,” Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, Vol. 61, No. 2, 2006, pp. 423–428.
Hepburn, Lisa, Matthew Miller, Deborah Azrael, and David Hemenway, “The Effect of Nondiscretionary Concealed Weapon Carrying Laws on Homicide,” Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, Vol. 56, No. 3, 2004, pp. 676–681.
Hernandez, Elizabeth, “At Least 30 Colorado School Districts and Charter Schools Allow Teachers to Carry Guns, but No Statewide Training Standards Regulate Them,” Denver Post, July 8, 2018.
Higgins, Julian P. T., and Sally Green, eds., Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, Version 5.1.0, London: Cochrane Collaboration, March 2011.
Hines, James R., Jr., “Taxing Consumption and Other Sins,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2007, pp. 49–68.
Hipple, N. K., E. F. McGarrell, M. O’Brien, and B. M. Huebner, “Gun Crime Incident Reviews as a Strategy for Enhancing Problem Solving and Information Sharing,” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 40, No. 1, 2017, pp. 50–67.
Hodur, Nancy M., F. Larry Leistritz, and Kara L. Wolfe, “Developing the Nature-Based Tourism Sector in Southwestern North Dakota,” Great Plains Research: A Journal of Natural and Social Sciences, Vol. 18, Spring 2008, pp. 81–92.
Hoffman, Steven J., and Charlie Tan, “Overview of Systematic Reviews on the Health-Related Effects of Government Tobacco Control Policies,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2015.
Hoskin, Anthony, “Household Gun Prevalence and Rates of Violent Crime: A Test of Competing Gun Theories,” Criminal Justice Studies, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2011, pp. 125–136.
Hoyt, L., and D. Gopal‐Agge, “The Business Improvement District Model: A Balanced Review of Contemporary Debates,” Geography Compass, Vol. 1, No. 4, 2007, pp. 946–958.
Huff‐Corzine, Lin, and Jay Corzine, “The Devil’s in the Details: Measuring Mass Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 317–333.
Huff-Corzine, Lin, James C. McCutcheon, Jay Corzine, John P. Jarvis, Melissa J. Tetzlaff-Bemiller, Mindy Weller, and Matt Landon, “Shooting for Accuracy: Comparing Data Sources on Mass Murder,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 105–124.
Hughes, Karen, Mark A. Bellis, Lisa Jones, Sara Wood, Geoff Bates, Lindsay Eckley, Ellie McCoy, Christopher Mikton, Tom Shakespeare, and Alana Officer, “Prevalence and Risk of Violence Against Adults with Disabilities: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies,” Lancet, Vol. 379, 2012, pp. 1621–1629.
Humphreys, David K., Antonio Gasparrini, and Douglas J. Wiebe, “Evaluating the Impact of Florida’s ‘Stand Your Ground’ Self-Defense Law on Homicide and Suicide by Firearm: An Interrupted Time Series Study,” JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 177, No. 1, 2017, pp. 44–50.
Hureau, David M., and Anthony A. Braga, “The Trade in Tools: The Market for Illicit Guns in High-Risk Networks,” Criminology, Vol. 56, No. 3, 2018, pp. 510–545.
IBISWorld, Guns and Ammunition Manufacturing in the U.S.: Market Research Report, Los Angeles, Calif., August 2016.
Ilgen, M. A., K. Zivin, R. J. McCammon, and M. Valenstein, “Mental Illness, Previous Suicidality, and Access to Guns in the United States,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 2, 2008, pp. 198–200.
Institute of Medicine, Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2011.
Ivey, Kay, Governor, “Memorandum: Implementation of the Alabama Sentry Program and the School Safety Training and Compliance Teams,” State of Alabama, May 30, 2018.
Jagodič, Helena Korošec, Tatjana Rokavec, Mark Agius, and Peter Pregelj, “Availability of Mental Health Service Providers and Suicide Rates in Slovenia: A Nationwide Ecological Study,” Croatian Medical Journal, Vol. 54, No. 5, 2013, pp. 444–452.
James, N., Recent Violent Crime Trends in the United States, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R45236, 2018.
Joe, S., S. C. Marcus, and M. S. Kaplan, “Racial Differences in the Characteristics of Firearm Suicide Decedents in the United States,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, Vol. 77, No. 1, 2007, pp. 124–130.
Johnson, R. M., C. Barber, D. Azrael, D. E. Clark, and D. Hemenway, “Who Are the Owners of Firearms Used in Adolescent Suicides?” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 40, No. 6, 2010, pp. 609–611.
Johnston, Jeff, “Can Ammunition ‘Go Bad’?” NRA Family, October 28, 2019.
Jones, Edward D., III, “The District of Columbia’s ‘Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975’: The Toughest Handgun Control Law in the United States—or Is It?” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 455, 1981, pp. 138–149.
Joossens, Luk, and Martin Raw, “From Cigarette Smuggling to Illicit Tobacco Trade,” Tobacco Control, Vol. 21, No. 2, 2012, pp. 230–234.
Joshi, M., and S. B. Sorenson, “Intimate Partner Violence at the Scene: Incident Characteristics and Implications for Public Health Surveillance,” Evaluation Review, Vol. 34, No. 2, 2010, pp. 116–136.
Juodis, Marcus, Andrew Starzomski, Stephen Porter, and Michael Woodworth, “A Comparison of Domestic and Non-Domestic Homicides: Further Evidence for Distinct Dynamics and Heterogeneity of Domestic Homicide Perpetrators,” Journal of Family Violence, Vol. 29, No. 3, 2014, pp. 299–313.
Kagawa, Rose M. C., Alvaro Castillo-Carniglia, Jon S. Vernick, Daniel Webster, Cassandra Crifasi, Kara E. Rudolph, Magdalena Cerdá, Aaron Shev, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Repeal of Comprehensive Background Check Policies and Firearm Homicide and Suicide,” Epidemiology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2018, pp. 494–502.
Kahan, Dan M., “The Politically Motivated Reasoning Paradigm, Part 2: Unanswered Questions,” in Robert Scott and Stephen Kosslyn, eds., Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences, New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2016.
Kahan, Dan M., “On the Sources of Ordinary Science Knowledge and Extraordinary Science Ignorance,” in Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Dan M. Kahan, and Dietram A. Scheufele, eds., Oxford Handbook of the Science of Science Communication, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Kahan, Dan M., E. Peters, E. Dawson, and P. Slovic, “Motivated Numeracy and Enlightened Self-Government,” Behavioural Public Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2017, pp. 54–86.
Kahane, Leo H., “Understanding the Interstate Export of Crime Guns: A Gravity Model Approach,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 31, No. 3, 2013, pp. 618–634.
Kahane, Leo H., “State Gun Laws and the Movement of Crime Guns Between States,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 61, 2020.
Kalesan, Bindu, Kinan Lagast, Marcos Villarreal, Elizabeth Pino, Jeffrey Fagan, and Sandro Galea, “School Shootings During 2013–2015 in the USA,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 23, No. 5, 2017, pp. 321–327.
Kalesan, Bindu, Matthew E. Mobily, Olivia Keiser, Jeffrey A. Fagan, and Sandro Galea, “Firearm Legislation and Firearm Mortality in the USA: A Cross-Sectional, State-Level Study,” Lancet, Vol. 387, No. 10030, April 30, 2016, pp. 1847–1855.
Kann, L., T. McManus, W. A. Harris, S. L. Shanklin, K. H. Flint, J. Hawkins, B. Queen, R. Lowry, E. O. Olsen, D. Chyen, L. Whittle, J. Thornton, C. Lim, Y. Yamakawa, N. Brener, and S. Zaza, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2015,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 65, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1–174.
Kann, Laura, Tim McManus, William A. Harris, Shari L. Shanklin, Katherine H. Flint, Barbara Queen, Richard Lowry, David Chyen, Lisa Whittle, Jemekia Thornton, Connie Lim, Denise Bradford, Yoshimi Yamakawa, Michelle Leon, Nancy Brener, and Kathleen A. Ethier, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2017,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 67, No. 8, 2018, pp. 1–114.
Kaplan, M. S., N. Huguet, B. H. McFarland, and J. A. Mandle, “Factors Associated with Suicide by Firearm Among U.S. Older Adult Men,” Psychology of Men and Masculinity, Vol. 13, No. 1, 2012, pp. 65–74.
Kaplan, M. S., B. H. McFarland, and N. Huguet, “Characteristics of Adult Male and Female Firearm Suicide Decedents: Findings from the National Violent Death Reporting System,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 15, No. 5, 2009, pp. 322–327.
Kapoor, Reena, Elissa Benedek, Richard J. Bonnie, Tanuja Gandhi, Liza Gold, Seth Judd, and Debra A. Pinals, “APA Resource Document on Risk-Based Gun Removal Laws,” Developments in Mental Health Law, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2018, pp. 6–16.
Kapusta, Nestor D., Thomas Niederkrotenthaler, Elmar Etzersdorfer, Martin Voracek, Kanita Dervic, Elisabeth Jandl-Jager, and Gernot Sonneck, “Influence of Psychotherapist Density and Antidepressant Sales on Suicide Rates,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Vol. 119, No. 3, 2009, pp. 236–242.
Kapusta, Nestor D., Martin Posch, Thomas Niederkrotenthaler, Melitta Fischer-Kern, Elmar Etzersdorfer, and Gernot Sonneck, “Availability of Mental Health Service Providers and Suicide Rates in Austria: A Nationwide Study,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 61, No. 12, 2010, pp. 1198–1203.
Kapusta, N. D., U. S. Tran, I. R. Rockett, D. DeLeo, C. P. Naylor, T. Niederkrotenthaler, M. Voracek, E. Etzersdorfer, and G. Sonneck, “Declining Autopsy Rates and Suicide Misclassification: A Cross-National Analysis of 35 Countries,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 68, No. 10, 2011, pp. 1050–1057.
Karp, Aaron, Estimating Global Civilian-Held Firearms Numbers, Geneva: Small Arms Survey, June 2018.
Kawaguchi, Hideaki, and Soichi Koike, “Association Between the Density of Physicians and Suicide Rates in Japan: Nationwide Ecological Study Using a Spatial Bayesian Model,” PLoS One, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2016.
Keller, Thomas Christoph, “ABC’s and AR-15’s: Arming Arkansas’s Teachers,” Arkansas Law Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, 2014, pp. 687–721.
Kellermann, Arthur L., and Frederick P. Rivara, “Silencing the Science on Gun Policy,” JAMA, Vol. 309, No. 6, 2013, pp. 549–550.
Kellermann, A. L., F. P. Rivara, G. Somes, D. T. Reay, J. Francisco, J. G. Banton, J. Prodzinski, C. Fligner, and B. B. Hackman, “Suicide in the Home in Relation to Gun Ownership,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 327, No. 7, 1992, pp. 467–472.
Kelling, G. L., T. Pate, D. Dieckman, and C. E. Brown, The Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment, Washington, D.C.: Police Foundation, 1974.
Kendall, Todd D., and Robert Tamura, “Unmarried Fertility, Crime, and Social Stigma,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2010, pp. 185–221.
Kennedy, D. M., “Pulling Levers: Chronic Offenders, High-Crime Settings, and a Theory of Prevention,” Valparaiso University Law Review, Vol. 31, No. 2, 1996, pp. 449–484.
Kennedy, D. M., “Whither Streetwork: The Place of Outreach Workers in Community Violence Prevention,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2011, pp. 1045–1051.
Kennedy, D. M., A. M. Piehl, and A. A. Braga, “Youth Violence in Boston: Gun Markets, Serious Youth Offenders, and a Use-Reduction Strategy,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 59, No. 1, 1996, pp. 147–196.
Kercher, Cassandra, David I. Swedler, Keshia M. Pollack, and Daniel W. Webster, “Homicides of Law Enforcement Officers Responding to Domestic Disturbance Calls,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 5, 2013, pp. 331–335.
Kessler, Ronald C., Howard Birnbaum, Olga Demler, Ian R. H. Falloon, Elizabeth Gagnon, Margaret Guyer, Mary J. Howes, Kenneth S. Kendler, Lizheng Shi, Ellen Walters, and Eric Q. Wu, “The Prevalence and Correlates of Nonaffective Psychosis in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R),” Biological Psychiatry, Vol. 58, No. 8, 2005, pp. 668–676.
Khan, Khalid S., Regina Kunz, Jos Kleijnen, and Gerd Antes, “Five Steps to Conducting a Systematic Review,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, Vol. 96, No. 3, 2003, pp. 118–121.
Khantzian, E. J., “The Self-Medication Hypothesis of Substance Use Disorders: A Reconsideration and Recent Applications,” Harvard Review of Psychiatry, Vol. 4, No. 5, 1997, pp. 231–244.
Kindy, Kimberly, “FBI to Sharply Expand System for Tracking Fatal Police Shootings,” Washington Post, December 8, 2015.
Kivisto, Aaron J., and Peter L. Phalen, “Effects of Risk-Based Firearm Seizure Laws in Connecticut and Indiana on Suicide Rates, 1981–2015,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 69, No. 8, 2018, pp. 855–862.
Kivisto, Aaron J., Bradley Ray, and Peter L. Phalen, “Firearm Legislation and Fatal Police Shootings in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 7, 2017, pp. 1068–1075.
Klarevas, Louis, Rampage Nation: Securing America from Mass Shootings, Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 2016.
Klarevas, Louis, “Letter to the Editor Re: DiMaggio, C. et al. ‘Changes in US Mass Shooting Deaths Associated with the 1994–2004 Federal Assault Weapons Ban: Analysis of Open-Source Data,’” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 86, No. 5, 2019, pp. 926–928.
Klarevas, Louis, Andrew Conner, and David Hemenway, “The Effect of Large-Capacity Magazine Bans on High-Fatality Mass Shootings, 1990–2017,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 109, No. 12, 2019, pp. 1754–1761.
Kleck, Gary, “Crime Control Through the Private Use of Armed Force,” Social Problems, Vol. 35, No. 1, 1988, pp. 1–21.
Kleck, Gary, Targeting Guns: Firearms and Their Control, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1997.
Kleck, Gary, “Degrading Scientific Standards to Get the Defensive Gun Use Estimate Down,” Journal on Firearms and Public Policy, Vol. 11, 1999, pp. 77–138.
Kleck, Gary, “The Nature and Effectiveness of Owning, Carrying and Using Guns for Self-Protection,” in G. Kleck and D. B. Kates, eds., Armed: New Perspectives on Gun Control, New York: Prometheus Books, 2001.
Kleck, Gary, “Measures of Gun Ownership Levels for Macro-Level Crime and Violence Research,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2004, pp. 3–36.
Kleck, Gary, Point Blank: Guns and Violence in America, New Brunswick, N.J.: AldineTransaction, 2009.
Kleck, Gary, “The Impact of Gun Ownership Rates on Crime Rates: A Methodological Review of the Evidence,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2015, pp. 40–48.
Kleck, Gary, “Large-Capacity Magazines and the Casualty Counts in Mass Shootings: The Plausibility of Linkages,” Justice Research and Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2016, pp. 28–47.
Kleck, Gary, “Response Errors in Surveys of Defensive Gun Use: A National Internet Survey Experiment,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 64, No. 9, 2018, pp. 1119–1142.
Kleck, Gary, Did Australia’s Ban on Semiauto Firearms Really Reduce Violence? A Critique of Chapman et al (2016) Study, Tallahassee, Fla.: Florida State University, working paper, January 12, 2018a.
Kleck, Gary, Do Mass Shooters Favor Using High-Capacity Magazines, Tallahassee, Fla.: Florida State University, working paper, March 10, 2020.
Kleck, G., and D. J. Bordua, “The Factual Foundation for Certain Key Assumptions of Gun Control,” Law and Policy, Vol. 5, No. 3, 1983, pp. 271–298.
Kleck, G., and M. A. DeLone, “Victim Resistance and Offender Weapon Effects in Robbery,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1993, pp. 55–81.
Kleck, Gary, and Marc G. Gertz, “Armed Resistance to Crime: The Prevalence and Nature of Self-Defense with a Gun,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 86, No. 1, 1995, pp. 150–187.
Kleck, Gary, Tomislav Kovandzic, and Mark E. Schaffer, Gun Prevalence, Homicide Rates and Causality: A GMM Approach to Endogeneity Bias, London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper No. 5357, 2005.
Kleck, G., and E. B. Patterson, “The Impact of Gun Control and Gun Ownership Levels on Violence Rates,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1993, pp. 249–287.
Klein, Jessie, The Bully Society: School Shootings and the Crisis of Bullying in America’s Schools, New York: New York University Press, 2012.
Klieve, Helen, Michael Barnes, and Diego De Leo, “Controlling Firearms Use in Australia: Has the 1996 Gun Law Reform Produced the Decrease in Rates of Suicide with This Method?” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 44, No. 4, 2009, pp. 285–292.
Klieve, H., J. Sveticic, and D. De Leo, “Who Uses Firearms as a Means of Suicide? A Population Study Exploring Firearm Accessibility and Method Choice,” BMC Medicine, Vol. 7, 2009.
Klinger, D., R. Rosenfeld, D. Isom, and M. Deckard, “Race, Crime, and the Micro-Ecology of Deadly Force,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 15, No. 1, February 2016, pp. 193–222.
Knicely, John, “One Washington School District Already Has Staff Armed with Guns,” KIRO 7, February 23, 2018.
Knight, Brian, “State Gun Policy and Cross-State Externalities: Evidence from Crime Gun Tracing,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 5, No. 4, 2013, pp. 200–229.
Knittel, Christopher R., and Ryan Sandler, “The Welfare Impact of Second-Best Uniform-Pigouvian Taxation: Evidence from Transportation,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2018, pp. 211–242.
Kochanek, Kenneth D., Sherry L. Murphy, Jiaquan Xu, and Elizabeth Arias, “Deaths: Final Data for 2017,” National Vital Statistics Reports, Vol. 68, No. 9, June 24, 2019.
Koehler, J. J., “The Influence of Prior Beliefs on Scientific Judgments of Evidence Quality,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 56, No. 1, 1993, pp. 28–55.
Kolla, B. P., S. S. O’Connor, and T. W. Lineberry, “The Base Rates and Factors Associated with Reported Access to Firearms in Psychiatric Inpatients,” General Hospital Psychiatry, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2011, pp. 191–196.
Koo, Denise, and Guthrie S. Birkhead, “Prospects and Challenges in Implementing Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance in the United States: Not a Flash in the Pan,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 3, Supp. 1, 1998, pp. 120–124.
Kopel, D. B., “Background Checks for Firearms Sales and Loans: Law, History, and Policy,” Harvard Journal on Legislation, Vol. 53, 2016, pp. 303–367.
Kopel, David B., “Red Flag Laws: Examining Guidelines for State Action,” testimony before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, Washington, D.C., March 26, 2019.
Koper, C. S., “Just Enough Police Presence: Reducing Crime and Disorderly Behavior by Optimizing Patrol Time in Crime Hot Spots,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 12, No. 4, 1995, pp. 649–672.
Koper, Christopher S., “Federal Legislation and Gun Markets: How Much Have Recent Reforms of the Federal Firearms Licensing System Reduced Criminal Gun Suppliers?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 1, No. 2, 2002, pp. 151–178.
Koper, Christopher. S., Crime Gun Risk Factors: Buyer, Seller, Firearm, and Transaction Characteristics Associated with Gun Trafficking and Criminal Gun Use, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 2003.
Koper, Christopher S., Updated Assessment of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban: Impacts on Gun Markets and Gun Violence 1994–2003, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 2004.
Koper, Christopher S., “Crime Gun Risk Factors: Buyer, Seller, Firearm, and Transaction Characteristics Associated with Gun Trafficking and Criminal Gun Use,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 30, No. 2, 2014, pp. 285–315.
Koper, Christopher S., “Assessing the Potential to Reduce Deaths and Injuries from Mass Shootings Through Restrictions on Assault Weapons and Other High‐Capacity Semiautomatic Firearms,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 147–170.
Koper, Christopher S., William D. Johnson, Jordan L. Nichols, Ambrozine Ayers, and Natalie Mullins, “Criminal Use of Assault Weapons and High-Capacity Semiautomatic Firearms: An Updated Examination of Local and National Sources,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018, pp. 313–321.
Koper, C. S., and E. Mayo-Wilson, “Police Crackdowns on Illegal Gun Carrying: A Systematic Review of Their Impact on Gun Crime,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2006, pp. 227–261.
Koper, C. S., E. Mayo-Wilson, and J. Smith, “Police Strategies to Reduce Illegal Possession and Carrying of Firearms: Effects on Gun Crime,” Campbell Systematic Reviews, Vol. 11, 2012.
Koper, Christopher S., and Jeffrey A. Roth, “The Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapon Ban on Gun Violence Outcomes: An Assessment of Multiple Outcome Measures and Some Lessons for Policy Evaluation,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2001, pp. 33–74.
Koper, Christopher S., and Jeffrey A. Roth, “Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban on Gun Markets: An Assessment of Short-Term Primary and Secondary Market Effects,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 18, No. 3, 2002, pp. 239–266.
Koper, C. S., D. J. Woods, and B. E. Kubu, “Gun Violence Prevention Practices Among Local Police in the United States,” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and Management, Vol. 36, No. 3, 2013, pp. 577–603.
Koseff, Alexei, “See Where California Is Taking Guns with Restraining Orders,” Sacramento Bee, August 1, 2017.
Kovandzic, Tomislav V., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns and Violent Crime: Crime Control Through Gun Control?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 2, No. 3, 2003, pp. 363–396.
Kovandzic, T. V., T. B. Marvell, and L. M. Vieraitis, “The Impact of ‘Shall-Issue’ Concealed Handgun Laws on Violent Crime Rates—Evidence from Panel Data for Large Urban Cities,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 9, No. 4, 2005, pp. 292–323.
Kovandzic, Tomislav, Mark E. Schaffer, and Gary Kleck, “Estimating the Causal Effect of Gun Prevalence on Homicide Rates: A Local Average Treatment Effect Approach,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2013, pp. 477–541.
Kposowa, A. J., “Association of Suicide Rates, Gun Ownership, Conservatism and Individual Suicide Risk,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 48, No. 9, 2013, pp. 1467–1479.
Kposowa, A., D. Hamilton, and K. Wang, “Impact of Firearm Availability and Gun Regulation on State Suicide Rates,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 46, No. 6, 2016, pp. 678–696.
Kremer, Michael, and Jack Willis, “Guns, Latrines, and Land Reform: Dynamic Pigouvian Taxation,” American Economic Review, Vol. 106, No. 5, 2016, pp. 83–88.
Krouse, W. J., Gun Control: Statutory Disclosure Limitations on ATF Firearms Trace Data and Multiple Handgun Sales Reports, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 7–5700, 2009.
Krouse, William J., and Daniel J. Richardson, Mass Murder with Firearms: Incidents and Victims, 1999–2013, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R44126, 2015.
Kubrin, Charis E., and Tim Wadsworth, “Explaining Suicide Among Blacks and Whites: How Socioeconomic Factors and Gun Availability Affect Race-Specific Suicide Rates,” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 90, No. 5, 2009, pp. 1203–1227.
Kung, H. C., J. L. Pearson, and X. Liu, “Risk Factors for Male and Female Suicide Decedents Ages 15–64 in the United States—Results from the 1993 National Mortality Followback Survey,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2003, pp. 419–426.
Kung, H. C., J. L. Pearson, and R. Wei, “Substance Use, Firearm Availability, Depressive Symptoms, and Mental Health Service Utilization Among White and African American Suicide Decedents Aged 15 to 64 Years,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 15, No. 8, 2005, pp. 614–621.
Kurtzleben, Danielle, “Fact Check: Are Gun-Makers ‘Totally Free of Liability for Their Behavior’?” NPR, October 6, 2015.
Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera, “Income Inequality and Mass Shootings in the United States,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2019a, article 1147.
Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera, “Social Integration and Mass Shootings in US Counties,” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 42, No. 2, 2019b, pp. 121–139.
Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera, “Socioeconomic Factors and Mass Shootings in the United States,” Critical Public Health, Vol. 29, No. 2, 2019c, pp. 138–145.
La Valle, James M., “Rebuilding at Gunpoint: A City-Level Re-Estimation of the Brady Law and RTC Laws in the Wake of Hurricane Katrina,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 18, No. 4, 2007, pp. 451–465.
La Valle, James M., “Re-Estimating Gun-Policy Effects According to a National Science Academy Report: Were Previous Reports of Failure Premature?” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 33, No. 1, 2010, pp. 71–95.
La Valle, James M., “‘Gun Control’ vs. ‘Self-Protection’: A Case Against the Ideological Divide,” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2013, pp. 1–26.
La Valle, James M., and Thomas C. Glover, “Revisiting Licensed Handgun Carrying: Personal Protection or Interpersonal Liability?” American Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2012, pp. 580–601.
LaFree, G., and C. Birbeck, Controlling New Mexico Juveniles’ Possession of Firearms, Albuquerque, N.M.: New Mexico Criminal Justice Statistical Analysis Center, Working Paper 27, 1998.
Lang, Matthew, “The Impact of Mental Health Insurance Laws on State Suicide Rates,” Health Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1, 2013, pp. 73–88.
Langhinrichsen-Rohling, Jennifer, “Top 10 Greatest ‘Hits’: Important Findings and Future Directions for Intimate Partner Violence Research,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2005, pp. 108–118.
Langhinrichsen-Rohling, Jennifer, Russell E. Palarea, Jennifer Cohen, and Martin L. Rohling, “Breaking Up Is Hard to Do: Unwanted Pursuit Behaviors Following the Dissolution of a Romantic Relationship,” in K. E. Davis, I. H. Frieze, and R. D. Maiuro, eds., Stalking: Perspectives on Victims and Perpetrators, New York: Springer, 2002, pp. 212–236.
Langman, Peter, “Different Types of Role Model Influence and Fame Seeking Among Mass Killers and Copycat Offenders,” American Behavioral Scientist, Vol. 62, No. 2, 2018, pp. 210–228.
Langton, L., Firearms Stolen During Household Burglaries and Other Property Crimes, 2005–2010, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 239436, 2012.
Lankford, Adam, “A Comparative Analysis of Suicide Terrorists and Rampage, Workplace, and School Shooters in the United States from 1990 to 2010,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 17, No. 3, 2013, pp. 255–274.
Lankford, Adam, “Mass Murderers in the United States: Predictors of Offender Deaths,” Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology, Vol. 26, No. 5, 2015, pp. 586–600.
Lankford, Adam, and James Silver, “Why Have Public Mass Shootings Become More Deadly? Assessing How Perpetrators’ Motives and Methods Have Changed over Time,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 37–60.
Laqueur, Hannah S., and Garen J. Wintemute, “Identifying High‐Risk Firearm Owners to Prevent Mass Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 109–127.
Lasley, James R., Using Traffic Barriers to “Design Out” Crime: A Program Evaluation of LAPD’s Operation Cul-de-Sac, Fullerton, Calif.: California State University, Division of Political Science and Criminal Justice, 1996.
Leask, Anna, “Raurimu 20 Years On: The Madman, the Massacre and the Memories,” New Zealand Herald, February 4, 2017.
Lee, Wang-Sheng, and Sandy Suardi, “The Australian Firearms Buyback and Its Effect on Gun Deaths,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 28, No. 1, 2010, pp. 65–79.
Lee, Y. Y., “Gentrification and Crime: Identification Using the 1994 Northridge Earthquake in Los Angeles,” Journal of Urban Affairs, Vol. 32, No. 5, 2010, pp. 549–577.
Lehnen, R., and W. Skogan, The National Crime Survey: Working Papers, Vol. 2: Methodological Studies, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1984.
Leigh, Andrew, and Christine Neill, “Do Gun Buybacks Save Lives? Evidence from Panel Data,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2010, pp. 509–557.
Levine, Phillip B., and Robin McKnight, “Firearms and Accidental Deaths: Evidence from the Aftermath of the Sandy Hook School Shooting,” Science, Vol. 358, No. 6368, 2017, pp. 1324–1328.
Levine, Phillip B., and Robin McKnight, Not All School Shootings Are the Same and the Differences Matter, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 26728, February 2020.
Lewiecki, E. M., and S. A. Miller, “Suicide, Guns, and Public Policy,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2013, pp. 27–31.
Lexington, “Why the NRA Keeps Talking About Mental Illness, Rather Than Guns,” Economist, March 13, 2013.
Levine, Phillip B., and Robin McKnight, Not All School Shootings Are the Same and the Differences Matter, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 26728, February 2020.
Li, Guohua, Susan P. Baker, Carla DiScala, Carolyn Fowler, Jean Ling, and Gabor D. Kelen, “Factors Associated with the Intent of Firearm-Related Injuries in Pediatric Trauma Patients,” Archives of Pediatric Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 11, 1996, pp. 1160–1165.
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger, “Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2014, pp. 302–342.
Li, Z., A. Page, G. Martin, and R. Taylor, “Attributable Risk of Psychiatric and Socio-Economic Factors for Suicide from Individual-Level, Population-Based Studies: A Systematic Review,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 72, No. 4, 2011, pp. 608–616.
Linden, Ariel, and Paul R. Yarnold, “The Australian Gun Buyback Program and Rate of Suicide by Firearm,” Optimal Data Analysis, Vol. 7, March 25, 2018, pp. 28–35.
Lipari, Rachel N., and Eunice Park-Lee, Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Rockville, Md.: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, August 2019.
Liu, E. C., E. Bagalman, V. S. Chu, and C. S. Redhead, Submission of Mental Health Records to the NICS and the HIPAA Privacy Rule, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R43040, 2013.
Liu, Gina, and Douglas J. Wiebe, “A Time-Series Analysis of Firearm Purchasing After Mass Shooting Events in the United States,” JAMA Network Open, Vol. 2, No. 4, 2019.
Loeber, R., and R. Stallings, “Modeling the Impact of Interventions on Local Indicators of Offending, Victimization, and Incarceration,” in R. Loeber and D. P. Farrington, eds., Young Homicide Offenders and Victims: Risk Factors, Prediction, and Prevention from Childhood, New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 137–152.
Loftin, Colin, and Ellen J. MacKenzie, “Building National Estimates of Violent Victimization,” paper presented at the National Research Council Symposium on the Understanding and Control of Violent Behavior, Destin, Fla., April 1–6, 1990.
Loftin, Colin, David McDowall, and Matthew D. Fetzer, “A Comparison of SHR and Vital Statistics Homicide Estimates for U.S. Cities,” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2008, pp. 4–17.
Loftin, C., D. McDowall, B. Wiersema, and T. J. Cottey, “Effects of Restrictive Licensing of Handguns on Homicide and Suicide in the District of Columbia,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 325, No. 23, 1991, pp. 1615–1620.
Logan, J., Holly A. Hill, Michele Lynberg Black, Alex E. Crosby, Debra L. Karch, Jamar D. Barnes, and Keri M. Lubell, “Characteristics of Perpetrators in Homicide-Followed-by-Suicide Incidents: National Violent Death Reporting System—17 U.S. States, 2003–2005,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 168, No. 9, 2008, pp. 1056–1064.
Longo, Daniel, Lock and Load: After Recent Sales Surge, Demand Normalizes as Fears of Gun Control Subside, Los Angeles, Calif., IBISWorld Industry Report 33299a: Guns and Ammunition Manufacturing in the U.S., June 2017.
Lott, John R., Jr., “The Concealed-Handgun Debate,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, January 1998a, pp. 221–243.
Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 1st ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1998b.
Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 2nd ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Lott, John R., Jr., The Bias Against Guns: Why Almost Everything You’ve Heard About Gun Control Is Wrong, Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, Inc., 2003.
Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 3rd ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Lott, John R., Jr., “The FBI’s Misinterpretation of the Change in Mass Public Shootings,” ACJS Today, Vol. 40, No. 2, 2015, pp. 18–29.
Lott, John R., Jr., Concealed Carry Permit Holders Across the United States: 2018, Alexandria, Va.: Crime Prevention Research Center, August 14, 2018.
Lott, John R., Jr., “Schools That Allow Teachers to Carry Guns Are Extremely Safe: Data on the Rate of Shootings and Accidents in Schools That Allow Teachers to Carry,” Alexandria, Va.: Crime Prevention Research Center, April 25, 2019.
Lott, John R., Jr., and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shootings, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Law School, John M. Olin Law and Economics Working Paper No. 73, 1999.
Lott, John R., Jr., and William Landes, “Multiple Victim Public Shootings,” 2000 (unpublished). As of June 29, 2017: http://www.shack.co.nz/pistoltaupo/SSRN_ID272929_code010610560.pdf
Lott, John R., Jr., Carlisle E. Moody, and John E. Whitley, “Re: ‘What Do We Know About the Association Between Firearm Legislation and Firearm-Related Injuries?’” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 184, No. 1, 2016, pp. 81–82.
Lott, John R., Jr., and D. B. Mustard, “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 26, No. 1, 1997, pp. 1–68.
Lott, John R., Florenz Plassmann, and John E. Whitley, “Confirming More Guns, Less Crime,” December 9, 2002.
Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Safe-Storage Gun Laws: Accidental Deaths, Suicides, and Crime,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. 2, 2001, pp. 659–689.
Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Measurement Error in County-Level UCR Data,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 19, No. 2, June 2003, pp. 185–198.
Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Abortion and Crime: Unwanted Children and Out-of-Wedlock Births,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 45, No. 2, 2007, pp. 304–324.
Lott, John R., Jr., John E. Whitley, and Rebekah C. Riley, Concealed Carry Permit Holders Across the United States, Crime Prevention Research Center, 2016.
Lowe, Sarah R., and Sandro Galea, “The Mental Health Consequences of Mass Shootings,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2017, pp. 62–82.
Lubin, G., N. Werbeloff, D. Halperin, M. Shmushkevitch, M. Weiser, and H. Y. Knobler, “Decrease in Suicide Rates After a Change of Policy Reducing Access to Firearms in Adolescents: A Naturalistic Epidemiological Study,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 40, No. 5, 2010, pp. 421–424.
Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin, The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy, working paper, Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School, 2016.
Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin, “Handgun Waiting Periods Reduce Gun Deaths,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 114, No. 46, 2017, pp. 12162–12165.
Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin, “The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 181, January 2020.
Ludwig, Jens, “Concealed-Gun-Carrying Laws and Violent Crime: Evidence from State Panel Data,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 18, No. 3, 1998, pp. 239–254.
Ludwig, Jens, “Gun Self-Defense and Deterrence,” Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, Vol. 27, 2000, pp. 363–417.
Ludwig, J., and P. J. Cook, “Homicide and Suicide Rates Associated with Implementation of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act,” JAMA, Vol. 284, No. 5, 2000, pp. 585–591.
Lum, Hillary D., Hanna K. Flaten, and Marian E. Betz, “Gun Access and Safety Practices Among Older Adults,” Current Gerontology and Geriatrics Research, Vol. 2016, 2016, pp. 1–5.
Luo, Michael, and Mike McIntire, “Children and Guns: The Hidden Toll,” New York Times, September 28, 2013.
Luoma, Jason B., Catherine E. Martin, and Jane L. Pearson, “Contact with Mental Health and Primary Care Providers Before Suicide: A Review of the Evidence,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 159, No. 6, 2002, pp. 909–916.
MacDonald, J., D. Golinelli, R. J. Stokes, and R. Bluthenthal, “The Effect of Business Improvement Districts on the Incidence of Violent Crimes,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 16, No. 5, 2010, pp. 327–332.
MacDonald, J., R. J. Stokes, B. Grunwald, and R. Bluthenthal, “The Privatization of Public Safety in Urban Neighborhoods: Do Business Improvement Districts Reduce Violent Crime Among Adolescents?” Law and Society Review, Vol. 47, No. 3, 2013, pp. 621–652.
MacKinnon, James G., and Matthew D. Webb, “Wild Bootstrap Inference for Wildly Different Cluster Sizes,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2017, pp. 233–254.
Madensen, T. D., and J. E. Eck, “Violence in Bars: Exploring the Impact of Place Manager Decision-Making,” Crime Prevention and Community Safety, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2008, pp. 111–125.
Maguire, E. R., C. W. Telep, and T. Abt, “The Effectiveness of Street Outreach Worker Programs for Reducing Violence: A Systematic Review,” Campbell Collaboration, 2018.
Maguire, E. R., C. D. Uchida, and K. D. Hassell, “Problem-Oriented Policing in Colorado Springs: A Content Analysis of 753 Cases,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 61, No. 1, 2015, pp. 71–95.
Maltz, M. D., and J. Targonski, “A Note on the Use of County-Level UCR Data," Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 18, No. 2, 2002, pp. 297–318.
Manning, Willard, “Comment: The Impact of Concealed-Carry Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 331–341.
Manski, Charles F., and John V. Pepper, How Do Right-to-Carry Laws Affect Crime Rates? Coping with Ambiguity Using Bounded-Variation Assumptions, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau for Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 21701, November 2015.
Manski, Charles F., and John V. Pepper, “How Do Right-to-Carry Laws Affect Crime Rates? Coping with Ambiguity Using Bounded-Variation Assumptions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 100, No. 2, 2018, pp. 232–244.
Mares, D., and E. Blackburn, “Evaluating the Effectiveness of an Acoustic Gunshot Location System in St. Louis, MO,” Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2012, pp. 26–42.
Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Public Safety Commission, Initial Report Submitted to the Governor, Speaker of the House of Representatives and Senate President, January 2, 2019.
Marron, Donald B., and Adele C. Morris, How Should Governments Use Revenue from Corrective Taxes? Washington, D.C.: Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, January 2016.
Martin, Robert A., and Richard L. Legault, “Systematic Measurement Error with State-Level Crime Data: Evidence from the ‘More Guns, Less Crime’ Debate,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 42, No. 2, May 2005, pp. 187–210.
Marvell, Thomas B., “The Impact of Banning Juvenile Gun Possession,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 691–713.
Mass Shooting Tracker, homepage, undated. As of June 3, 2020: https://www.massshootingtracker.org
Masters, Kate, “Fear of Other People Is Now the Primary Motivation for American Gun Ownership, a Landmark Survey Finds,” The Trace, September 19, 2016.
Matejkowski, J., J. Fairfax-Columbo, S. W. Cullen, S. C. Marcus, and P. L. Solomon, “Exploring the Potential of Stricter Gun Restrictions for People with Serious Mental Illness to Reduce Homicide in the United States,” Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology, Vol. 25, No. 3, 2014, pp. 362–369.
Matthay, Ellicott C., Jessica Galin, Kara E. Rudolph, Kriszta Farkas, Garen J. Wintemute, and Jennifer Ahern, “In-State and Interstate Associations Between Gun Shows and Firearm Deaths and Injuries: A Quasi-Experimental Study,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 167, No. 12, 2017, pp. 837–844. 
Maxson, C. L., K. M. Hennigan, and D. C. Sloane, “‘It's Getting Crazy Out There’: Can a Civil Gang Injunction Change a Community?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 3, 2005, pp. 577–605.
Mayors Against Illegal Guns, “Access Denied: How the Gun Lobby Is Depriving Police, Policy Makers, and the Public of the Data We Need to Prevent Gun Violence,” Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, 2013.
Mazerolle, L. G., C. Watkins, D. Rogan, and J. Frank, “Using Gunshot Detection Systems in Police Departments: The Impact on Police Response Times and Officer Workloads,” Police Quarterly, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1998, pp. 21–49.
McCarthy, John F., Frederic C. Blow, Rosalinda V. Ignacio, Mark A. Ilgen, Karen L. Austin, and Marcia Valenstein, “Suicide Among Patients in the Veterans Affairs Health System: Rural-Urban Differences in Rates, Risks, and Methods,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 102, No. S1, March 2012, pp. S111–S117.
McClellan, Chandler, and Erdal Tekin, “Stand Your Ground Laws, Homicides, and Injuries,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 52, No. 3, 2017, pp. 621–653.
McClelland, Robert, “New Gun and Ammo Taxes Sound Like Promising Ways to Reduce Gun Violence. But There Are Problems,” Washington, D.C.: Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, May 24, 2018.
McClelland, Robert, and Sarah Gault, The Synthetic Control Method as a Tool to Understand State Policy, Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 2017.
McDonald, J. F., “An Economic Analysis of Guns, Crime, and Gun Control,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1999, pp. 11–19.
McDowall, D., C. Loftin, and S. Presser, “Measuring Civilian Defensive Firearm Use: A Methodological Experiment,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 16, No. 1, 2000, pp. 1–19.
McDowall, D., C. Loftin, and B. Wiersema, “Estimates of the Frequency of Firearm Self Defense from the National Crime Victimization Survey,” Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York, School of Criminal Justice, Violence Research Group Discussion Paper 20, 1998 (unpublished).
McDowall, D., and B. Wiersema, “The Incidence of Defensive Firearm Use by U.S. Crime Victims, 1987 Through 1990,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 84, No. 12, 1994, pp. 1982–1984.
McFarlane, J., J. C. Campbell, S. Wilt, C. Sachs, Y. Ulrich, and X. Xu, “Stalking and Intimate Partner Femicide,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 3, 1999, pp. 300–316.
McGarrell, E. F., “Research Foundations and Implications for Practice,” Department of Justice Journal of Federal Law and Practice, Vol. 66, No. 6, 2018, pp. 3–12.
McGarrell, E. F., N. Corsaro, N. K. Hipple, and T. S. Bynum, “Project Safe Neighborhoods and Violent Crime Trends in US Cities: Assessing Violent Crime Impact,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2010, pp. 165–190.
McGee, K. S., T. Coyne-Beasley, and R. M. Johnson, “Review of Evaluations of Educational Approaches to Promote Safe Storage of Firearms,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2003, pp. 108–111.
McGinty, Emma E., Alene Kennedy-Hendricks, Seema Choksy, and Colleen L. Barry, “Trends in News Media Coverage of Mental Illness in the United States: 1995–2014,” Health Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1121–1129.
McGinty, E. E., D. W. Webster, M. Jarlenski, and C. L. Barry, “News Media Framing of Serious Mental Illness and Gun Violence in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 3, 2014, pp. 406–413.
McPhedran, Samara, “A Systematic Review of Quantitative Evidence About the Impacts of Australian Legislative Reform on Firearm Homicide,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, Vol. 28, 2016, pp. 64–72.
McPhedran, Samara, “An Evaluation of the Impacts of Changing Firearms Legislation on Australian Female Firearm Homicide Victimization Rates,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 24, No. 7, May 2018, pp. 798–815.
McPhedran, Samara, and Jeanine Baker, “Mass Shootings in Australia and New Zealand: A Descriptive Study of Incidence,” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2011.
McPhedran, Samara, and Jeanine Baker, “Lethal and Non-Lethal Violence Against Women in Australia: Measurement Challenges, Conceptual Frameworks, and Limitations in Knowledge,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 18, No. 8, 2012, pp. 958–972.
Mercy, James A., Robin Ikeda, and Kenneth E. Powell, “Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance: An Overview of Progress and the Challenges Ahead,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 3, Supp. 1, 1998, pp. 6–16.
Metzl, J. M., and K. T. MacLeish, “Mental Illness, Mass Shootings, and the Politics of American Firearms,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 2, 2015, pp. 240–249.
Miletich, Steve, “‘Extreme Risk’: Seattle Police Have Seized 43 Guns from People Deemed to Be a Danger Under Year-Old Law,” Seattle Times, May 24, 2018.
Mill, John Stuart, A System of Logic, London: Parker, 1843.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, and C. Barber, “Suicide Mortality in the United States: The Importance of Attending to Method in Understanding Population-Level Disparities in the Burden of Suicide,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 33, 2012, pp. 393–408.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, and D. Hemenway, “Household Firearm Ownership and Suicide Rates in the United States,” Epidemiology, Vol. 13, No. 5, 2002, pp. 517–524.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, and D. Hemenway, “The Epidemiology of Case Fatality Rates for Suicide in the Northeast,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 43, No. 6, 2004, pp. 723–730.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, D. Hemenway, and M. Vriniotis, “Firearm Storage Practices and Rates of Unintentional Firearm Deaths in the United States,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2005, pp. 661–667.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, L. Hepburn, D. Hemenway, and S. J. Lippmann, “The Association Between Changes in Household Firearm Ownership and Rates of Suicide in the United States, 1981–2002,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2006, pp. 178–182.
Miller, M., C. Barber, D. Azrael, D. Hemenway, and B. E. Molnar, “Recent Psychopathology, Suicidal Thoughts and Suicide Attempts in Households With and Without Firearms: Findings from the National Comorbidity Study Replication,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2009, pp. 183–187.
Miller, M., C. Barber, R. A. White, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in the United States: Is Risk Independent of Underlying Suicidal Behavior?” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 178, No. 6, 2013, pp. 946–955.
Miller, M., and D. Hemenway, “The Relationship Between Firearms and Suicide: A Review of the Literature,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, Vol. 4, No. 1, 1999, pp. 59–75.
Miller, M., D. Hemenway, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in the Northeast,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 57, No. 3, 2004, pp. 626–632.
Miller, Matthew, Katherine Hempstead, Tuan Nguyen, Catherine Barber, Sarah Rosenberg-Wohl, and Deborah Azrael, “Method Choice in Nonfatal Self-Harm as a Predictor of Subsequent Episodes of Self-Harm and Suicide: Implications for Clinical Practice,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 6, 2013a, pp. e61–e68.
Miller, M., L. Hepburn, and D. Azrael, “Firearm Acquisition Without Background Checks: Results of a National Survey,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 166, 2017, pp. 233–239.
Miller, M., S. A. Swanson, and D. Azrael, “Are We Missing Something Pertinent? A Bias Analysis of Unmeasured Confounding in the Firearm-Suicide Literature,” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 62–69.
Miller, M., M. Warren, D. Hemenway, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in U.S. Cities,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 21, No. E1, 2015, pp. E116–E119.
Milne, John S., Stephen W. Hargarten, Arthur L. Kellermann, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Effect of Current Federal Regulations on Handgun Safety Features,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2003, pp. 1–9.
Mitchell, R. J., “Frequency Versus Duration of Police Patrol Visits for Reducing Crime in Hot Spots: Non-Experimental Findings from the Sacramento Hot Spots Experiment,” Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based Policing, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2017, pp. 22–37.
Molina, J. A., and R. Duarte, “Risk Determinants of Suicide Attempts Among Adolescents,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 65, No. 2, 2006, pp. 407–434.
Monroe, Jeffrey D., Homicide and Gun Control: The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act and Homicide Rates, New York: LFB Scholarly Publishing, 2008.
Monuteaux, M. C., D. Azrael, and M. Miller, “Association of Increased Safe Household Firearm Storage with Firearm Suicide and Unintentional Death Among US Youths,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 173, No. 7, 2019, pp. 657–662.
Monuteaux, M. C., L. K. Lee, D. Hemenway, R. Mannix, and E. W. Fleegler, “Firearm Ownership and Violent Crime in the U.S.: An Ecologic Study,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 49, No. 2, 2015, pp. 207–214.
Moody, Carlisle E., “Testing for the Effects of Concealed Weapons Laws: Specification Errors and Robustness,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 799–813.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 5, No. 3, 2008, pp. 269–293.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws, Continued,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2009, pp. 203–217.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “On the Choice of Control Variables in the Crime Equation,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 72, No. 5, 2010, pp. 696–715.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws: A Critique of the 2014 Version of Aneja, Donohue, and Zhang,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2018a, pp. 51–66.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Clustering and Standard Error Bias in Fixed Effects Panel Data Regressions,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, May 2018b, pp. 1–23.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Clustering and Standard Error Bias in Fixed Effects Panel Data Regressions,” Journal ofQuantitative Criminology, Vol. 36, No. 4, June 2020, pp. 347–369.
Moody, Carlisle E., Thomas B. Marvell, Paul R. Zimmerman, and Fasil Alemante, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime: An Exercise in Replication,” Review of Economics and Finance, Vol. 4, 2014, pp. 33–43.
Moreno-Küstner, Berta, Carlos Martín, and Loly Pastor, “Prevalence of Psychotic Disorders and Its Association with Methodological Issues: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses,” PLoS One, Vol. 13, No. 4, 2018.
Morral, Andrew R., Terry L. Schell, and Margaret Tankard, The Magnitude and Sources of Disagreement Among Gun Policy Experts, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2088/1-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088z1.html
Moskos, Michelle A., Lenora Olson, Sarah R. Halbern, and Doug Gray, “Utah Youth Suicide Study: Barriers to Mental Health Treatment for Adolescents,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2007, pp. 179–186.
Moyer, R., J. M. MacDonald, G. Ridgeway, and C. C. Branas, “Effect of Remediating Blighted Vacant Land on Shootings: A Citywide Cluster Randomized Trial,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 109, No. 1, 2019, pp. 140–144.
Munasib, Abdul, Genti Kostandini, and Jeffrey L. Jordan, “Impact of the Stand Your Ground Law on Gun Deaths: Evidence of a Rural Urban Dichotomy,” European Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 45, No. 3, 2018, pp. 527–554.
Murder Accountability Project, “Clearance Rates: Uniform Crime Report for Homicides: 1965–2018,” 2019. As of January 24, 2020: http://www.murderdata.org/p/blog-page.html
Murphy v. Guerrero, 2016 U.S. Dist. Northern Mariana Islands, 9th Circuit, September 28, 2016.
Mustard, David B., “The Impact of Gun Laws on Police Deaths,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 635–657.
Musu, Lauren, Anlan Zhang, Ke Wang, Jizhi Zhang, and Barbara A. Oudekerk, Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2018, Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, NCES 2019-047, NCJ 252571, April 2019.
Nagin, D. S., “Deterrence in the Twenty-First Century,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 42, No. 1, 2013, pp. 199–263.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Proactive Policing: Effects on Crime and Communities, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2018.
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, “Resource Guide: Uniform Crime Reporting Program,” webpage, undated. As of October 20, 2019: https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/content/NACJD/guides/ucr.html
National Cancer Institute, The Role of the Media in Promoting and Reducing Tobacco Use, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, No. 07–6242, 2008.
National Conference of State Legislatures, Fiscal Affairs Program, Tax Policy Handbook for State Legislators, 3rd ed., Washington, D.C., February 2010.
National Network for Safe Communities, Group Violence Intervention: An Implementation Guide, Washington, D.C.: Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, 2016.
National Research Council, Understanding and Preventing Violence, A. J. Reiss and J. Roth, eds., Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 1993.
National Research Council, Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2004.
National Research Council, Fairness and Effectiveness in Policing: The Evidence, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2004a.
National Research Council, Estimating the Incidence of Rape and Sexual Assault, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2014.
National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “State Gun Laws,” webpage, undated. As of January 11, 2018: https://www.nraila.org/gun-laws/state-gun-laws
National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “Bloomberg Course Continues Bloomberging Rights Away,” May 24, 2019a.
National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “New Zealand Experience Further Proves Registration Facilitates Confiscations,” July 8, 2019b.
National Shooting Sports Foundation, “Modern Sporting Rifle: Introduction,” webpage, undated. As of October 14, 2019: https://www.nssf.org/msr/
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms Production in the United States, Newtown, Conn., 2015.
National Shooting Sports Foundation, “Project ChildSafe,” webpage, 2016. As of January 10, 2017: http://www.projectchildsafe.org/
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms and Ammunition Industry Economic Impact Report, Newtown, Conn., 2017.
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms and Ammunition Industry Economic Impact Report, Newtown, Conn., 2019.
Nelson, Charles M., Economic Implications of Land Use Patterns for Natural Resource Recreation and Tourism, Lansing, Mich.: Michigan Land Resource Project, Public Sector Consultants, 2001.
Nelson, Jodi L., “The Lautenberg Amendment: An Essential Tool for Combatting Domestic Violence,” North Dakota Law Review, Vol. 75, No. 2, 1999, pp. 365–390.
Nelson, Jon P., “Gender Differences in Alcohol Demand: A Systematic Review of the Role of Prices and Taxes,” Health Economics, Vol. 23, No. 10, 2014, pp. 1260–1280.
Newman, Benjamin J., and Todd K. Hartman, “Mass Shootings and Public Support for Gun Control,” British Journal of Political Science, Vol. 49, No. 4, 2019, pp. 1527–1553.
Niederkrotenthaler, Thomas, Joseph E. Logan, Debra L. Karch, and Alex Crosby, “Characteristics of U.S. Suicide Decedents in 2005–2010 Who Had Received Mental Health Treatment,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 65, No. 3, 2014, pp. 387–390.
Niforatos, Joshua D., Alexander R. Zheutlin, and Richard M. Pescatore, “Public Interest in Gun Control in the USA,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 25, Supp. 1, 2019, pp. i16–i17.
Noar, Seth M., Christina N. Benac, and Melissa S. Harris, “Does Tailoring Matter? Meta-Analytic Review of Tailored Print Health Behavior Change Interventions,” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 133, No. 4, 2007, pp. 673–693.
Nordentoft, Merete, Preben Bo Mortensen, and Carsten Bøcker Pedersen, “Absolute Risk of Suicide After First Hospital Contact in Mental Disorder,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 68, No. 10, October 2011, pp. 1058–1064.
NRC—See National Research Council.
NSSF—See National Shooting Sports Foundation.
Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of Justice, Audit of the Handling of Firearms Purchase Denials Through the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, Washington, D.C., September 2016.
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, OJJDP Statistical Briefing Book, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, May 25, 2016.
Office of the Surgeon General and National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, National Strategy for Suicide Prevention: Goals and Objectives for Action: A Report of the U.S. Surgeon General and of the National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2012.
Olson, David E., and Michael D. Maltz, “Right-to-Carry Concealed Weapon Laws and Homicide in Large U.S. Counties: The Effect on Weapon Types, Victim Characteristics, and Victim-Offender Relationships,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 747–770.
Oslin, D. W., C. Zubritsky, G. Brown, M. Mullahy, A. Puliafico, and T. Ten Have, “Managing Suicide Risk in Late Life: Access to Firearms as a Public Health Risk,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2004, pp. 30–36.
O’Sullivan, A., “Gentrification and Crime,” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 57, No. 1, 2005, pp. 73–85.
Owens, David, Judith Horrocks, and Allan House, “Fatal and Non-Fatal Repetition of Self-Harm,” British Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 181, No. 3, 2002, pp. 193–199.
Ozanne-Smith, J., K. Ashby, S. Newstead, V. Z. Stathakis, and A. Clapperton, “Firearm Related Deaths: The Impact of Regulatory Reform,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 10, No. 5, 2004, pp. 280–286.
Palmer, Brian A., V. Shane Pankratz, and John Michael Bostwick, “The Lifetime Risk of Suicide in Schizophrenia: A Reexamination,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 62, No. 3, 2005, pp. 247–253.
Papachristos, A. V., T. L. Meares, and J. Fagan, “Attention Felons: Evaluating Project Safe Neighborhoods in Chicago,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, Vol. 4, No. 2, 2007, pp. 223–272.
Papachristos, A. V., C. M. Smith, M. L. Scherer, and M. A. Fugiero, “More Coffee, Less Crime? The Relationship Between Gentrification and Neighborhood Crime Rates in Chicago, 1991 to 2005,” City and Community, Vol. 10, No. 3, 2011, pp. 215–240.
Papachristos, A. V., C. Wildeman, and E. Roberto, “Tragic, but Not Random: The Social Contagion of Nonfatal Gunshot Injuries,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 125, 2015, pp. 139–150.
Park, Sung-Yeon, Kyle J. Holody, and Xiaoqun Zhang, “Race in Media Coverage of School Shootings: A Parallel Application of Framing Theory and Attribute Agenda Setting,” Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, Vol. 89, No. 3, 2012, pp. 475–494.
Parker, George F., “Circumstances and Outcomes of a Firearm Seizure Law: Marion County, Indiana, 2006–2013,” Behavioral Sciences and the Law, Vol. 33, No. 2-3, 2015, pp. 308–322.
Parker, Kim, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Ruth Igielnik, Baxter Oliphant, and Anna Brown, America’s Complex Relationship with Guns, Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center, June 22, 2017.
Parker, R. N., K. R. Williams, K. J. McCaffree, E. K. Acensio, A. Browne, K. J. Strom, and K. Barrick, “Alcohol Availability and Youth Homicide in the 91 Largest U.S. Cities, 1984–2006,” Drug and Alcohol Review, Vol. 30, No. 5, 2011, pp. 505–514.
Paternoster, R., “The Deterrent Effect of the Perceived Certainty and Severity of Punishment: A Review of the Evidence and Issues,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 4, No. 2, 1987, pp. 173–217.
Penzenstadler, Nick, Ryan J. Foley, and Larry Fenn, “Accidental Shootings Involving Kids Often Go Unpunished,” Associated Press, May 24, 2017.
Pérez-Peña, Richard, “Two New Zealand Mosques, a Hate-Filled Massacre Designed for Its Time,” New York Times, March 15, 2019.
Pescosolido, Bernice A., Bianca Manago, and John Monahan, “Evolving Public Views on the Likelihood of Violence from People with Mental Illness: Stigma and Its Consequences,” Health Affairs, Vol. 38, No. 10, October 2019, pp. 1735–1743.
Petrosky, Emiko, Janet M. Blair, Carter J. Betz, Katherine A. Fowler, Shane P. D. Jack, and Bridget H. Lyons, “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Homicides of Adult Women and the Role of Intimate Partner Violence—United States, 2003–2014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 66, No. 28, 2017, pp. 741–746.
Phillips, C. D., O. Nwaiwu, D. K. McMaughan Moudouni, R. Edwards, and S. Lin, “When Concealed Handgun Licensees Break Bad: Criminal Convictions of Concealed Handgun Licensees in Texas, 2001–2009,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2013, pp. 86–91.
Phillips, J. A., and C. N. Nugent, “Antidepressant Use and Method of Suicide in the United States: Variation by Age and Sex, 1998–2007,” Archives of Suicide Research, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2013, pp. 360–372.
Phipson, Belinda, and Gordon K. Smyth, “Permutation P-Values Should Never Be Zero: Calculating Exact P-Values When Permutations Are Randomly Drawn,” Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2010.
Pierce, Glenn L., Anthony A. Braga, Christopher Koper, Jack McDevitt, David Carlson, Jeffrey Roth, Alan Saiz, Raymond Hyatt, and Roberta E. Griffith, The Characteristics and Dynamics of Crime Gun Markets: Implications for Supply-Side Focused Enforcement Strategies, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 2003.
Pinho, R., and J. Rappa, Special Taxes on Guns, Ammunition, and Gun Shows, Hartford, Conn.: Connecticut General Assembly, Office of Legislative Research, OLR Research Report 2013-r-0034, January 10, 2013.
Pirkola, Sami, Reijo Sund, Eila Sailas, and Kristian Wahlbeck, “Community Mental-Health Services and Suicide Rate in Finland: A Nationwide Small-Area Analysis,” Lancet, Vol. 373, No. 9658, 2009, pp. 147–153.
Piscopo, Kathryn, Rachel N. Lipari, Jennifer Cooney, and Christie Galsheen, Suicidal Thoughts and Behavior Among Adults: Results from the 2015 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, NSDUH Data Review, September 2016.
Piza, E. L., J. M. Caplan, L. W. Kennedy, and A. M. Gilchrist, “The Effects of Merging Proactive CCTV Monitoring with Directed Police Patrol: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2015, pp. 43–69.
Pizarro, Jesenia M., and April M. Zeoli, “An Assessment of the Quality of Homicide Data in the Supplementary Homicide Reports: A Research Note,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 30, No. 4, 2013, pp. 711–731.
Planty, Michael, and Jennifer L. Truman, Firearm Violence, 1993–2011, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 2411730, May 2013.
Plassmann, Florenz, and T. Nicolaus Tideman, “Does the Right to Carry Concealed Handguns Deter Countable Crimes? Only a Count Analysis Can Say,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 771–798.
Plassmann, F., and J. E. Whitley, “Comments: Confirming ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003, pp. 1313–1369.
Plumer, Brad, “Everything You Need to Know About the Assault Weapons Ban, in One Post,” Washington Post, December 17, 2012.
Poudyal, N., S. H. Cho, and J. M. Bowker, “Demand for Resident Hunting in the Southeastern United States,” Human Dimensions of Wildlife, Vol. 13, No. 3, 2008, pp. 158–174.
Price, James H., Adam J. Mrdjenovich, and Joseph A. Dake, “Prevalence of State Firearm Mortality and Mental Health Care Resources,” Journal of Community Health, Vol. 34, No. 5, 2009, pp. 383–391.
Price, James H., Amy J. Thompson, and Joseph A. Dake, “Factors Associated with State Variations in Homicide, Suicide, and Unintentional Firearm Deaths,” Journal of Community Health, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2004, pp. 271–283.
Prickett, Kate C., Alexa Martin-Storey, and Robert Crosnoe, “State Firearm Laws, Firearm Ownership, and Safety Practices Among Families of Preschool-Aged Children,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 6, 2014, pp. 1080–1086.
90–618, Gun Control Act of 1968, October 22, 1968.
103–322, Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, 1994.
104–208, Section 658, Gun Ban for Individuals Convicted of a Misdemeanor Crime of Domestic Violence, 1996.
112–74, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012, December 23, 2011.
112–265, Investigative Assistance for Violent Crimes Act of 2012, January 14, 2013.
116–94, Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, December 23, 2019.
Puzzanchera, C., G. Chamberlin, and W. Kang, “Easy Access to the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980–2014,” Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2017.
Puzzanchera, C., G. Chamberlin, and W. Kang, “Easy Access to the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980–2016,” Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2018.
Raissian, Kerri M., “Hold Your Fire: Did the 1996 Federal Gun Control Act Expansion Reduce Domestic Homicides?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 35, No. 1, Winter 2016, pp. 67–93.
Rajkumar, A. P., E. M. Brinda, A. S. Duba, P. Thangadurai, and K. S. Jacob, “National Suicide Rates and Mental Health System Indicators: An Ecological Study of 191 Countries,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, Vol. 36, No. 5, 2013, pp. 339–342.
RAND Corporation, The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United States, Santa Monica, Calif., RR-2088-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088.html
Rangappa, Asha, “The Cost of Freedom: Using the Tax Power to Limit Personal Arsenals,” Yale Law and Policy Review Inter Alia, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2013, pp. 17–24.
Raphael, S., and J. Ludwig, “Prison Sentence Enhancements: The Case of Project Exile,” in S. Raphael and J. Ludwig, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2003, pp. 251–286.
Ratcliffe, J. H., M. Lattanzio, G. Kikuchi, and K. Thomas, “A Partially Randomized Field Experiment on the Effect of an Acoustic Gunshot Detection System on Police Incident Reports,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2019, pp. 67–76.
Reaves, Brian A., Using NIBRS Data to Analyze Violent Crime, Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics, October 1993.
Reisch, T., T. Steffen, A. Habenstein, and W. Tschacher, “Change in Suicide Rates in Switzerland Before and After Firearm Restriction Resulting from the 2003 ‘Army XXI’ Reform,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 170, No. 9, 2013, pp. 977–984.
Ressler, Robert K., Ann W. Burgess, and John E. Douglas, Sexual Homicide: Patterns and Motives, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988.
Reuter, Peter, and Jenny Mouzos, “Australia: A Massive Buyback of Low-Risk Guns,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 121–156.
Ribeiro, J. D., J. C. Franklin, K. R. Fox, K. H. Bentley, E. M. Kleiman, B. P. Chang, and M. K. Nock, “Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors as Risk Factors for Future Suicide Ideation, Attempts, and Death: A Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 46, No. 2, January 2016, pp. 225–236.
Richmond, Matthew, “With No National Standards, Policies for Arming Teachers Are Often Left to Local School Districts,” Guns & America, March 22, 2019.
Robbins, Mel, “The Real Gun Problem Is Mental Health, Not the NRA,” CNN, 2014.
Roberts, Darryl W., “Intimate Partner Homicide: Relationships to Alcohol and Firearms,” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2009, pp. 67–88.
Roberts, John M., Jr., Aki Roberts, and Tim Wadsworth, “Multiple Imputation for Missing Values in Homicide Incident Data: An Evaluation Using Unique Test Data,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2018, pp. 391–409.
Robinson, Jo, Lay San Too, Jane Pirkis, and Matthew J. Spittal, “Spatial Suicide Clusters in Australia Between 2010 and 2012: A Comparison of Cluster and Non-Cluster Among Young People and Adults,” BMC Psychiatry, Vol. 16, 2016, article 417.
Rockett, Ian R. H., Eric D. Caine, Steven Stack, Hilary S. Connery, Kurt B. Nolte, Christa L. Lilly, Ted R. Miller, Lewis S. Nelson, Sandra L. Putnam, Paul S. Nestadt, and Haomiao Jia, “Method Overtness, Forensic Autopsy, and the Evidentiary Suicide Note: A Multilevel National Violent Death Reporting System Analysis,” PLoS One, Vol. 13, No. 5, May 2018.
Rockett, Ian R. H., Nestor D. Kapusta, and Jeffrey H. Coben, “Beyond Suicide: Action Needed to Improve Self-Injury Mortality Accounting,” JAMA Psychiatry, Vol. 71, No. 3, 2014, pp. 231–232.
Rodway, Cathryn, Sandra Flynn, David While, Mohammed S. Rahman, Navneet Kapur, Louis Appleby, and Jenny Shaw, “Patients with Mental Illness as Victims of Homicide: A National Consecutive Case Series,” Lancet Psychiatry, Vol. 1, No. 2, 2014, pp. 129–134.
Roeder, Oliver, “The Phrase ‘Mass Shooting’ Belongs to the 21st Century,” FiveThirtyEight, January 21, 2016.
Rogers, William H., “Regression Standard Errors in Clustered Samples,” Stata Technical Bulletin, Vol. 13, 1993, pp. 19–23.
Roman, C. G., N. W. Link, J. M. Hyatt, A. Bhati, and M. Forney, “Assessing the Gang-Level and Community-Level Effects of the Philadelphia Focused Deterrence Strategy,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, 2018, pp. 1–29.
Roncek, D. W., and P. A. Maier, “Bars, Blocks, and Crimes Revisited: Linking the Theory of Routine Activities to the Empiricism of ‘Hot Spots,’” Criminology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 1991, pp. 725–753.
Rosenfeld, R., and R. Fornango, “The Impact of Police Stops on Precinct Robbery and Burglary Rates in New York City, 2003–2010,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 1, 2014, pp. 96–122.
Rosenfeld, R., R. Fornango, and E. Baumer, “Did Ceasefire, Compstat, and Exile Reduce Homicide?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 3, 2005, pp. 419–449.
Rosengart, M., P. Cummings, A. Nathens, P. Heagerty, R. Maier, and F. Rivara, “An Evaluation of State Firearm Regulations and Homicide and Suicide Death Rates,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2005, pp. 77–83.
Roskam, Kelly, and Vicka Chaplin, “The Gun Violence Restraining Order: An Opportunity for Common Ground in the Gun Violence Debate,” Developments in Mental Health Law, Vol. 36, No. 2, 2017, pp. 1–22.
Rostker, Bernard D., Lawrence M. Hanser, William M. Hix, Carl Jensen, Andrew R. Morral, Greg Ridgeway, and Terry L. Schell, Evaluation of the New York City Police Department Firearm Training and Firearm-Discharge Review Process, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-717-NYPD, 2008. As of October 6, 2019: https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG717.html
Roth, Jeffrey A., and Christopher S. Koper, Impact Evaluation of the Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act of 1994: Final Report, Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 1997.
Roth, Jeffrey A., and Christopher S. Koper, Impacts of the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban: 1994–96, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, March 1999.
Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Deborah Azrael, Vivian H. Lyons, Joseph A. Simonetti, and Matthew Miller, “Loaded Handgun Carrying Among US Adults, 2015,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 12, 2017, pp. 1930–1936.
Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Vivian H. Lyons, Joseph A. Simonetti, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Formal Firearm Training Among Adults in the USA: Results of a National Survey,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2018, pp. 161–165.
Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Joseph A. Simonetti, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Effectiveness of Interventions to Promote Safe Firearm Storage,” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 111–124.
Ruback, R. B., J. N. Shaffer, and V. A. Clark, “Easy Access to Firearms: Juveniles’ Risks for Violent Offender and Violent Victimization,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 26, No. 10, 2011, pp. 2111–2138.
Rubin, Paul H., and Hashem Dezhbakhsh, “The Effect of Concealed Handgun Laws on Crime: Beyond the Dummy Variables,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2003, pp. 199–216.
Ruddell, R., and G. L. Mays, “State Background Checks and Firearms Homicides,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2005, pp. 127–136.
Rudolph, K. E., E. A. Stuart, J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Association Between Connecticut’s Permit-to-Purchase Handgun Law and Homicides,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 8, 2015, pp. E49–E54.
Ruggles, K. V., and S. Rajan, “Gun Possession Among American Youth: A Discovery-Based Approach to Understand Gun Violence,” PLoS One, Vol. 9, No. 11, 2014.
Ryan, R., A. Synnot, and S. Hill, Describing Results, Melbourne: Cochrane Consumers and Communication Group, December 1, 2016.
Sakinofsky, Isaac, “Repetition of Suicidal Behavior,” in K. Hawton and K. P. van Heeringen, eds., The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide, West Sussex, England: John Wiley and Sons, 2000.
Saltzman, Linda E., and Robin M. Ikeda, “Recommended Data Elements for Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 3, Supp. 1, 1998, pp. 113–119.
Saltzman, Linda E., James A. Mercy, Patrick W. O’Carroll, Mark L. Rosenberg, and Philip H. Rhodes, “Weapon Involvement and Injury Outcomes in Family and Intimate Assaults,” JAMA, Vol. 267, No. 22, 1992, pp. 3043–3047.
Sanders, Nathan E., and Victor Lei, “The Role of Prior Information in Inference on the Annualized Rates of Mass Shootings in the United States,” Statistics and Public Policy, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2018, pp. 1–8.
Santaella-Tenorio, J., M. Cerdá, A. Villaveces, and S. Galea, “What Do We Know About the Association Between Firearm Legislation and Firearm-Related Injuries?” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 140–157.
Sarani, Babak, Cheralyn Hendrix, Mary Matecki, Jordan Estroff, Richard L. Amdur, Bryce R. H. Robinson, Geoff Shapiro, Stephen Gondek, Roger Mitchell, and E. Reed Smith, “Wounding Patterns Based on Firearm Type in Civilian Public Mass Shootings in the United States,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons, Vol. 228, No. 3, 2019, pp. 228–234.
Saunders, J., P. Hunt, and J. S. Hollywood, “Predictions Put into Practice: A Quasi-Experimental Evaluation of Chicago’s Predictive Policing Pilot,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016, pp. 347–371.
Saunders, J., A. Ober, D. Barnes-Proby, and R. K. Brunson, “Police Legitimacy and Disrupting Overt Drug Markets,” Policing: An International Journal, Vol. 30, No. 4, 2016, pp. 667–679.
Schaechter, Judy, Isis Duran, Jacqueline De Marchena, Glendene Lemard, and Maria Elena Villar, “Are ‘Accidental’ Gun Deaths as Rare as They Seem? A Comparison of Medical Examiner Manner of Death Coding with an Intent-Based Classification Approach,” Pediatrics, Vol. 111, No. 4, 2003, pp. 741–744.
Schell, Terry L., Beth Ann Griffin, and Andrew R. Morral, Evaluating Methods to Estimate the Effect of State Laws on Firearm Deaths: A Simulation Study, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2685-RC, 2018. As of October 1, 2019: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2685.html
Schell, Terry L., and Andrew R. Morral, Evaluating Methods and Findings from a Study of State Gun Policies, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1642-RC, 2016. As of January 13, 2017: http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1642.html
Schildkraut, Jaclyn, H. Jaymi Elsass, and Kimberly Meredith, “Mass Shootings and the Media: Why All Events Are Not Created Equal,” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 41, No. 3, 2018, pp. 223–243.
Schnebly, Stephen M., “An Examination of the Impact of Victim, Offender, and Situational Attributes on the Deterrent Effect of Defensive Gun Use: A Research Note,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2002, pp. 377–398.
Schnitzer, Patricia G., Heather K. Dykstra, Theodore E. Trigylidas, and Richard Lichenstein, “Firearm Suicide Among Youth in the United States, 2004–2015,” Journal of Behavioral Medicine, Vol. 42, No. 4, 2019, pp. 584–590.
Schnobrich-Davis, J., S. Block, and J. Lupacchino, “Analysis of Herman Goldstein Problem-Oriented Policing Awards from 1993–2017,” Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 2018.
Schorr, Robert A., Paul M. Lukacs, and Justin A. Gude, “The Montana Deer and Elk Hunting Population: The Importance of Cohort Group, License Price, and Population Demographics on Hunter Retention, Recruitment, and Population Change,” Journal of Wildlife Management, Vol. 78, No. 5, 2014, pp. 944–952.
Sen, B., and A. Panjamapirom, “State Background Checks for Gun Purchase and Firearm Deaths: An Exploratory Study,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2012, pp. 346–350.
Shaffer, J. P., “Multiple Hypothesis Testing,” Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 46, 1995, pp. 561–584.
Shah, S., R. E. Hoffman, L. Wake, and W. M. Marine, “Adolescent Suicide and Household Access to Firearms in Colorado: Results of a Case-Control Study,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2000, pp. 157–163.
Sharkey, P., Uneasy Peace: The Great Crime Decline, the Renewal of City Life, and the Next War on Violence, New York: W. W. Norton, 2018.
Sharkey, P., G. Torrats-Espinosa, and D. Takyar, “Community and the Crime Decline: The Causal Effect of Local Nonprofits on Violent Crime,” American Sociological Review, Vol. 82, No. 6, 2017, pp. 1214–1240.
Shearer, Hannah E., and Allison S. Anderman, “Analyzing Gun-Violence-Prevention Taxes Under Emerging Firearm Fee Jurisprudence,” Southern Illinois University Law Journal, Vol. 43, 2018, pp. 157–192.
Sheley, J. F., and J. D. Wright, Gun Acquisition and Possession in Selected Juvenile Samples, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 1993.
Sheley, J. F., and J. D. Wright, High School Youths, Weapons, and Violence: A National Survey, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 1998.
Shenassa, E. D., S. N. Catlin, and S. L. Buka, “Gun Availability, Psychopathology, and Risk of Death from Suicide Attempt by Gun,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 10, No. 7, October 2000, p. 482.
Shenassa, E. D., C. Daskalakis, and S. L. Buka, “Utility of Indices of Gun Availability in the Community,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 60, No. 1, 2006, pp. 44–49.
Shenassa, E. D., M. L. Rogers, K. L. Spalding, and M. B. Roberts, “Safer Storage of Firearms at Home and Risk of Suicide: A Study of Protective Factors in a Nationally Representative Sample,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 58, No. 10, 2004, pp. 841–848.
Sherman, L. W., “Police Crackdowns: Initial and Residual Deterrence,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 12, 1990, pp. 1–48.
Sherman, L. W., P. R. Gartin, and M. E. Buerger, “Hot Spots of Predatory Crime: Routine Activities and the Criminology of Place,” Criminology, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1989, pp. 27–56.
Shi, Wei, and Lung-fei Lee, “The Effects of Gun Control on Crimes: A Spatial Interactive Fixed Effects Approach,” Empirical Economics, Vol. 55, No. 1, 2018, pp. 233–263.
Shumway, Martha, Jennifer Alvidrez, Mark Leary, Deborah Sherwood, Eric Woodard, Emily K. Lee, Heather Hall, Ralph A. Catalano, and James W. Dilley, “Impact of Capacity Reductions in Acute Public-Sector Inpatient Psychiatric Services,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 63, No. 2, 2012, pp. 135–141.
Sidebottom, A., and N. Tilley, “Improving Problem-Oriented Policing: The Need for a New Model?” Crime Prevention and Community Safety, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2011, pp. 79–101.
Sidman, Elanor A., David C. Grossman, Thomas D. Koepsell, Luann D’Ambrosio, John Britt, Evan S. Simpson, Frederick P. Rivara, and Abraham B. Bergman, “Evaluation of a Community-Based Handgun Safe-Storage Campaign,” Pediatrics, Vol. 115, No. 6, 2005, pp. E654–E661.
Siegel, Michael, Molly Pahn, Ziming Xuan, Craig S. Ross, Sandro Galea, Bindu Kalesan, Eric Fleegler, and Kristin A. Goss, “Firearm-Related Laws in All 50 US States, 1991–2016,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 7, 2017a, pp. 1122–1129.
Siegel, Michael, Craig S. Ross, and Charles King, “Examining the Relationship Between the Prevalence of Guns and Homicide Rates in the USA Using a New and Improved State-Level Gun Ownership Proxy,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 20, No. 6, 2014, pp. 424–426.
Siegel, Michael, Ziming Xuan, Craig S. Ross, Sandro Galea, Bindu Kalesan, Eric Fleegler, and Kristin A. Goss, “Easiness of Legal Access to Concealed Firearm Permits and Homicide Rates in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 12, 2017b, pp. 1923–1929.
Silva, Jason R., and Joel A. Capellan, “A Comparative Analysis of Media Coverage of Mass Public Shootings: Examining Rampage, Disgruntled Employee, School, and Lone-Wolf Terrorist Shootings in the United States,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 30, No. 9, 2019a, pp. 1312–1341.
Silva, Jason R., and Joel A. Capellan, “The Media’s Coverage of Mass Public Shootings in America: Fifty Years of Newsworthiness,” International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2019b, pp. 77–97.
Silver, James, William Fisher, and John Horgan, “Public Mass Murderers and Federal Mental Health Background Checks,” Law and Policy, Vol. 40, No. 2, 2018, pp. 133–147.
Silver, James, Andre Simons, and Sarah Craun, A Study of the Pre-Attack Behaviors of Active Shooters in the United States Between 2000 and 2013, Washington, D.C.: Federal Bureau of Investigation, June 2018.
Simon, Robert I., and Liza H. Gold, “Decreasing Suicide Mortality: Clinical Risk Assessment and Firearm Management,” in Liza H. Gold and Robert I. Simon, eds., Gun Violence and Mental Illness, Arlington, Va.: American Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2016, pp. 249–289.
Simon, T. R., A. C. Swann, K. E. Powell, L. B. Potter, M. Kresnow, and P. W. O’Carroll, “Characteristics of Impulsive Suicide Attempts and Attempters,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 32, Supp. 1, 2002, pp. 49–59.
Simonetti, Joseph A., Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Firearm Storage Practices and Risk Perceptions Among a Nationally Representative Sample of U.S. Veterans With and Without Self‐Harm Risk Factors,” Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior, Vol. 49, No. 3, 2019, pp. 653–664.
Simonetti, Joseph A., Jessica L. Mackelprang, Ali Rowhani-Rahbar, Douglas Zatzick, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Psychiatric Comorbidity, Suicidality, and in-Home Firearm Access Among a Nationally Representative Sample of Adolescents,” JAMA Psychiatry, Vol. 72, No. 2, 2015, pp. 152–159.
Simonetti, Joseph A., Mary Kay Theis, Ali Rowhani-Rahbar, Evette J. Ludman, and David C. Grossman, “Firearm Storage Practices in Households of Adolescents With and Without Mental Illness,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 61, No. 5, 2017, pp. 583–590.
Skeem, Jennifer, and Edward Mulvey, “What Role Does Serious Mental Illness Play in Mass Shootings, and How Should We Address It?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 85–108.
Slutkin, G., C. Ransford, and R. B. Decker, “Cure Violence: Treating Violence as a Contagious Disease,” in M. D. Maltz and S. K. Rice, Envisioning Criminology, New York: Springer, 2015, pp. 43–56.
Small Arms Survey, “Annexe 4. The Largest Civilian Firearms Arsenals for 178 Countries,” in Small Arms Survey 2007: Guns and the City, Geneva: Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, August 2007.
Smart, Rosanna, Andrew R. Morral, Sierra Smucker, Samantha Cherney, Terry L. Schell, Samuel Peterson, Sangeeta C. Ahluwalia, Matthew Cefalu, Lea Xenakis, Rajeev Ramchand, and Carole Roan Gresenz, The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United States, 2nd ed., Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2088-1-RC/AV, 2020. As of March 30, 2020: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088-1.html
Smart, Rosanna, Andrew R. Morral, and Terry L. Schell, The Magnitude and Sources of Disagreement Among Gun Policy Experts, 2nd ed., Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A243-3, 2021. As of November 30, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA243-3.html
Smith, N. D., and I. Kawachi, “State-Level Social Capital and Suicide Mortality in the 50 U.S. States,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 120, 2014, pp. 269–277.
Smith, P. N., J. Currier, and K. Drescher, “Firearm Ownership in Veterans Entering Residential PTSD Treatment: Associations with Suicide Ideation, Attempts, and Combat Exposure,” Psychiatry Research, Vol. 229, No. 1–2, 2015, pp. 220–224.
Smith, Sharon G., Jieru Chen, Kathleen C. Basile, Leah K. Gilbert, Melissa T. Merrick, Nimesh Patel, Margie Walling, and Anurag Jain, The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010–2012 State Report, Atlanta, Ga.: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017.
Smith, Sharon G., Katherine A. Fowler, and Phyllis H. Niolon, “Intimate Partner Homicide and Corollary Victims in 16 States: National Violent Death Reporting System, 2003–2009,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 3, 2014, pp. 461–466.
Smith, T. W., and J. Son, Trends in Gun Ownership in the United States, 1972–2014, Chicago, Ill.: NORC at the University of Chicago, March 2015.
Smucker, Sierra, Rose E. Kerber, and Philip J. Cook, “Suicide and Additional Homicides Associated with Intimate Partner Homicide: North Carolina 2004–2013,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018, pp. 337–343.
Snyder, L. B., and M. A. Hamilton, “A Meta-Analysis of U.S. Health Campaign Effects on Behavior: Emphasize Enforcement, Exposure, and New Information, and Beware the Secular Trend,” in R. C. Hornik, ed., Public Health Communication: Evidence for Behavior Change, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2002, pp. 357–383.
Sorenson, Susan B., “Guns in Intimate Partner Violence: Comparing Incidents by Type of Weapon,” Journal of Women’s Health, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2017, pp. 249–258.
Sorenson, Susan B., and Rebecca A. Schut, “Nonfatal Gun Use in Intimate Partner Violence: A Systematic Review of the Literature,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 19, No. 4, 2018, pp. 431–442.
Southwick Associates, Target Shooting in America, Newtown, Conn.: National Shooting Sports Foundation, 2013.
Spicer, R. S., and T. R. Miller, “Suicide Acts in 8 States: Incidence and Case Fatality Rates by Demographics and Method,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 90, No. 12, 2000, pp. 1885–1891.
Spitzer, Robert J., “Gun Law History in the United States and Second Amendment Rights,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 80, No. 2, 2017, pp. 55–83.
Stander, V. A., S. M. Hilton, A. P. Doran, A. D. Werbel, and C. J. Thomsen, Department of the Navy Suicide Incident Report (DONSIR): Summary of 1999–2004 Findings, San Diego, Calif.: Naval Health Research Center, 2006.
Stanford Geospatial Center, “Mass Shootings in America,” Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Libraries, undated. As of June 3, 2020: https://library.stanford.edu/projects/mass-shootings-america
Stanford Geospatial Center, “MSA,” GitHub data repository, March 26, 2018. As of December 11, 2020: https://github.com/StanfordGeospatialCenter/MSA
Stark, David E., "Methods and Annotated Code Pertaining to Funding and Publication of Research on Gun Violence and Other Leading Causes of Death," GitHub, January 4, 2017. As of February 1, 2018: https://github.com/davidestark/gun-violence-research
Stark, David E., and Nigam H. Shah, “Funding and Publication of Research on Gun Violence and Other Leading Causes of Death,” JAMA, Vol. 317, No. 1, January 3, 2017, pp. 84–86.
Steadman, Henry J., John Monahan, Debra A. Pinals, Roumen Vesselinov, and Pamela Clark Robbins, “Gun Violence and Victimization of Strangers by Persons with a Mental Illness: Data from the MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 66, No. 11, 2015, pp. 1238–1241.
Steadman, Henry J., Edward P. Mulvey, John Monahan, Pamela Clark Robbins, Paul S. Appelbaum, Thomas Grisso, Loren H. Roth, and Eric Silver, “Violence by People Discharged from Acute Psychiatric Inpatient Facilities and by Others in the Same Neighborhoods,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 55, No. 5, 1998, pp. 393–401.
Stehr, Mark, “Cigarette Tax Avoidance and Evasion,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2005, pp. 277–297.
Stehr, Mark, “The Effect of Sunday Sales Bans and Excise Taxes on Drinking and Cross-Border Shopping for Alcoholic Beverages,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 60, No. 1, 2007, pp. 85–105.
Steidley, Trent Taylor, Movements, Malefactions, and Munitions: Determinants and Effects of Concealed Carry Laws in the United States, dissertation, Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University, 2016.
Steidley, Trent, and Martin T. Kosla, “Toward a Status Anxiety Theory of Macro-Level Firearm Demand,” Social Currents, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2018, pp. 86–103.
Stevens, Marguerite M., Ardis L. Olson, Cecelia A. Gaffney, Tor D. Tosteson, Leila A. Mott, and Pamela Starr, “A Pediatric, Practice-Based, Randomized Trial of Drinking and Smoking Prevention and Bicycle Helmet, Gun, and Seatbelt Safety Promotion,” Pediatrics, Vol. 109, No. 3, 2002, pp. 409–407.
Stevenson, Dru, “The Urgent Need for Legal Scholarship on Firearm Policy,” Buffalo Law Review, Vol. 67, No. 5, 2019, pp. 1449–1506.
Stone, Deborah M., Kristin M. Holland, Lara B. Schiff, and Wendy LiKamWa McIntosh, “Mixed Methods Analysis of Sex Differences in Life Stressors of Middle-Aged Suicides,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 51, No. 5, Supp. 3, 2016, pp. S209–S218.
Stone, Michael H., “Mass Murder, Mental Illness, and Men,” Violence and Gender, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2015, pp. 51–86.
Strnad, Jeff, “Should Legal Empiricists Go Bayesian?” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 9, No. 1, Spring 2007, pp. 195–303.
Studdert, David M., Yifan Zhang, Jonathan A. Rodden, Rob J. Hyndman, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Handgun Acquisitions in California After Two Mass Shootings,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 166, No. 10, 2017, pp. 698–706.
Studdert, David M., Yifan Zhang, Sonja A. Swanson, Lea Prince, Jonathan A. Rodden, Erin E. Holsinger, Matthew J. Spittal, Garen J. Wintemute, and Matthew Miller, “Handgun Ownership and Suicide in California,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 382, No. 23, 2020, pp. 2220–2229.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Mental Health: Mental Health Detailed Tables, Rockville, Md., 2016.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables, Rockville, Md., 2018.
Sullum, Jacob, “Colorado’s New ‘Red Flag’ Law Illustrates the Pitfalls of Disarming People Based on Their Future Behaviors,” Reason Foundation, April 29, 2019.
Sumner, S. A., P. M. Layde, and C. E. Guse, “Firearm Death Rates and Association with Level of Firearm Purchase Background Check,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 35, No. 1, 2008, pp. 1–6.
Sun, L., G. C. van Kooten, and G. M. Voss, “Demand for Wildlife Hunting in British Columbia,” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 53, No. 1, March 2005, pp. 25–46.
Swahn, M. H., B. Ali, R. M. Bossarte, M. van Dulmen, A. Crosby, A. C. Jones, and K. C. Schinka, “Self-Harm and Suicide Attempts Among High-Risk, Urban Youth in the U.S.: Shared and Unique Risk and Protective Factors,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2012, pp. 178–191.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., “Mental Disorder, Substance Abuse, and Community Violence: An Epidemiological Approach,” in J. Monahan and H. Steadman, eds., Violence and Mental Disorder, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 101–136.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michele M. Easter, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Charles M. Belden, Michael A. Norko, Allison G. Robertson, Linda K. Frisman, Hsiu-Ju Lin, Marvin S. Swartz, and George F. Parker, “Criminal Justice and Suicide Outcomes with Indiana's Risk-Based Gun Seizure Law,” Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, Vol. 47, No. 2, 2019, pp. 1–10.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michele M. Easter, Allison G. Robertson, Marvin S. Swartz, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Daniel Moseley, Charles Dion, and John Petrila, “Gun Violence, Mental Illness, and Laws That Prohibit Gun Possession: Evidence from Two Florida Counties,” Health Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1067–1075.
Swanson, J. W., C. E. Holzer III, V. K. Ganju, and R. T. Jono, “Violence and Psychiatric Disorder in the Community: Evidence from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Surveys,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 41, No. 7, 1990, pp. 761–770.
Swanson, J. W., E. E. McGinty, S. Fazel, and V. M. Mays, “Mental Illness and Reduction of Gun Violence and Suicide: Bringing Epidemiologic Research to Policy,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 25, No. 5, 2015, pp. 366–376.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michael A. Norko, Hsiu-Ju Lin, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Linda K. Frisman, Madelon V. Baranoski, Michele M. Easter, Allison G. Robertson, Marvin S. Swartz, and Richard J. Bonnie, “Implementation and Effectiveness of Connecticut's Risk-Based Gun Removal Law: Does It Prevent Suicides?” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 80, No. 2, 2017, pp. 179–208.
Swanson, J. W., A. G. Robertson, L. K. Frisman, M. A. Norko, H. Lin, M. S. Swartz, and P. J. Cook, “Preventing Gun Violence Involving People with Serious Mental Illness,” in D. W. Webster and J. S. Vernick, eds., Reducing Gun Violence in America: Informing Policy with Evidence and Analysis, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013, pp. 33–51.
Swedler, D. I., M. M. Simmons, F. Dominici, and D. Hemenway, “Firearm Prevalence and Homicides of Law Enforcement Officers in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 10, 2015, pp. 2042–2048.
Tark, Jongyeon, and Gary Kleck, “Resisting Crime: The Effects of Victim Action on the Outcomes of Crimes,” Criminology, Vol. 42, No. 4, 2004, pp. 861–909.
Tate, Julie, Jennifer Jenkins, and Steven Rich, “Fatal Force,” Washington Post, March 31, 2019. As of November 18, 2019: https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2018/national/police-shootings-2018/
Taylor, Melanie A., “A Comprehensive Study of Mass Murder Precipitants and Motivations of Offenders,” International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, Vol. 62, No. 2, 2018, pp. 427–449.
Teisl, M. F., K. J. Boyle, and R. E. Record, Jr., “License-Sales Revenues: Understanding Angler and Hunter Reaction to Changes in License Prices,” Human Dimensions of Wildlife, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1999, pp. 1–17.
Teplin, L. A., G. M. McClelland, K. M. Abram, and D. A. Weiner, “Crime Victimization in Adults with Severe Mental Illness: Comparison with the National Crime Victimization Survey,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 62, No. 8, 2005, pp. 911–921.
Thompson, R., V. Kane, J. M. Cook, R. Greenstein, P. Walker, and G. Woody, “Suicidal Ideation in Veterans Receiving Treatment for Opiate Dependence,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Vol. 38, No. 2, 2006, pp. 149–156.
Thomson Healthcare, Ranking America’s Mental Health: An Analysis of Depression Across the States, Washington, D.C.: Mental Health America, 2007.
Tillyer, M. S., R. S. Engel, and B. Lovins, “Beyond Boston: Applying Theory to Understand and Address Sustainability Issues in Focused Deterrence Initiatives for Violence Reduction,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 58, No. 6, 2012, pp. 973–997.
Tillyer, M. S., and D. M. Kennedy, “Locating Focused Deterrence Approaches Within a Situational Crime Prevention Framework,” Crime Prevention and Community Safety, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2008, pp. 75–84.
Tita, G. E., A. A. Braga, G. Ridgeway, and G. L. Pierce, “The Criminal Purchase of Firearm Ammunition,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 5, 2006, pp. 308–311.
Tondo, Leonardo, Matthew J. Albert, and Ross J. Baldessarini, “Suicide Rates in Relation to Health Care Access in the United States: An Ecological Study,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, Vol. 67, No. 4, 2006, pp. 517–523.
Tritch, Teresa, “Keep Handguns Away from Teenagers,” New York Times, May 30, 2014.
Tyler, T. R., J. Fagan, and A. Geller, “Street Stops and Police Legitimacy: Teachable Moments in Young Urban Men’s Legal Socialization,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, Vol. 11, No. 4, 2014, pp. 751–785.
Uggen, C., and S. McElrath, “Six Social Sources of the U.S. Crime Drop,” Society Pages, February 4, 2013.
Ukert, Benjamin, Elena Andreyeva, and Charles C. Branas, “Time Series Robustness Checks to Test the Effects of the 1996 Australian Firearm Law on Cause-Specific Mortality,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 14, No. 2, 2018, pp. 141–154.
United States Code, Title 18, Chapter 44, Firearms.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 921, Definitions.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 922, Unlawful Acts.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 923, Licensing.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 926, Rules and Regulations.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 930, Possession of Firearms and Dangerous Weapons in Federal Facilities.
United States Code, Title 20, Section 7961, Gun-Free Schools Act.
United States Code, Title 26, Section 5801, Imposition of Tax.
United States Code, Title 26, Section 5841, Registration of Firearms.
United States Concealed Carry Association, “Traveling? Know Concealed Carry Permit Info by State,” West Bend, Wisc., August 7, 2013.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Current Employment Statistics (National),” 2017. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ceseeb1a.htm
U.S. Census Bureau, Number of Firms, Number of Establishments, Employment, and Annual Payroll by Enterprise Employment Size for the United States, All Industries: 2014, Washington, D.C., December 2016.
U.S. Census Bureau, “U.S. and World Population Clock,” 2017. As of March 22, 2017: https://www.census.gov/popclock/
U.S. Census Bureau, “National Population by Characteristics: 2010–2019,” web tool, June 17, 2020. As of June 20, 2020: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-national-detail.html
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Active Shooter: How to Respond, Washington, D.C., October 2008.
U.S. Department of Justice, “Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 Fact Sheet,” Washington, D.C., October 24, 1994. As of May 30, 2017: https://www.ncjrs.gov/txtfiles/billfs.txt
U.S. Department of Justice, “Department of Justice Awards $1 Million to the National Crime Prevention Council to Support Gun Safety Campaign,” press release, March 7, 2013.
U.S. Department of Labor, Fact Sheet: The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA), Washington, D.C., January 29, 2010. As of October 18, 2017: https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/fact-sheets/mhpaea.pdf
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Hunting License Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, May 5, 2015.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 2016 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation, Washington, D.C., FHW/16-NAT, April 2018.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, and U.S. Department of Commerce, 2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation, Washington, D.C., FH2/11-NAT, 2012.
U.S. General Accounting Office, Firearms Purchased from Federal Firearm Licensees Using Bogus Identification, Washington, D.C., GAO-01–427NI, 2001.
U.S. House of Representatives, Gun Violence Prevention and Community Safety Act of 2020, Bill 5717, January 30, 2020.
USA Carry, “Concealed Carry Permit Reciprocity Maps,” webpage, April 20, 2017. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.usacarry.com/concealed_carry_permit_reciprocity_maps.html
van Dijk, Jan, John van Kesteren, and Paul Smit, Criminal Victimisation in International Perspective: Key Findings from the 2004–2005 ICVS and EU ICS, New York: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2007.
Vernick, Jon S., Ted Alcorn, and Joshua Horwitz, “Background Checks for All Gun Buyers and Gun Violence Restraining Orders: State Efforts to Keep Guns from High-Risk Persons,” Journal of Law, Medicine, and Ethics, Vol. 45, Supp. 1, 2017, pp. 98–102.
Vernick, J. S., and L. M. Hepburn, “State and Federal Gun Laws: Trends for 1970–1999,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 345–402.
Vernick, Jon S., Daniel W. Webster, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Effects of Maryland's Law Banning Saturday Night Special Handguns on Crime Guns,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 5, No. 4, 1999, pp. 259–263.
Vespa, Jonathan, Jamie M. Lewis, and Rose M. Kreider, America’s Families and Living Arrangements: 2012, Current Population Reports, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau, P20–570, 2013.
Vigdor, E. R., and J. A. Mercy, “Disarming Batterers: The Impact of Domestic Violence Firearms Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 157–200.
Vigdor, E. R., and J. A. Mercy, “Do Laws Restricting Access to Firearms by Domestic Violence Offenders Prevent Intimate Partner Homicide?” Evaluation Review, Vol. 30, No. 3, 2006, pp. 313–346.
Vince, Joseph J., Timothy Wolfe, and Layton Field, Firearms Training and Self-Defense: Does the Quality and Frequency of Training Determine the Realistic Use of Firearms by Citizens for Self-Defense? Chicago, Ill.: National Gun Victims Action Council, 2015.
Violence Policy Center, “Concealed Carry Killers,” webpage, 2017. As of March 23, 2017: http://concealedcarrykillers.org/
Violence Policy Center, Firearm Justifiable Homicides and Non-Fatal Self-Defense Gun Use: An Analysis of Federal Bureau of Investigation and National Crime Victimization Survey Data, Washington, D.C., September 2018.
The Violence Project, “Mass Shooter Database,” web tool, undated. As of June 8, 2020: https://www.theviolenceproject.org/mass-shooter-database/
Vittes, K. A., and S. B. Sorenson, “Recreational Gun Use by California Adolescents,” Health Education and Behavior, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2005, pp. 751–766.
Vittes, K. A., J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Legal Status and Source of Offenders’ Firearms in States with the Least Stringent Criteria for Gun Ownership,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 1, June 23, 2012, pp. 26–31.
Vittes, Katherine A., Daniel W. Webster, Shannon Frattaroli, Barbara E. Claire, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Removing Guns from Batterers: Findings from a Pilot Survey of Domestic Violence Restraining Order Recipients in California,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 19, No. 5, 2013, pp. 602–616.
Vyrostek, S. B., J. L. Annest, and G. W. Ryan, “Surveillance for Fatal and Nonfatal Injuries—United States, 2001,” MMWR Surveillance Summary, Vol. 53, 2004, pp. 1–57.
Wadsworth, T., C. E. Kubrin, and J. R. Herting, “Investigating the Rise (and Fall) of Young Black Male Suicide in the United States, 1982–2001,” Journal of African American Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 72–91.
Wadsworth, Tim, and John M. Roberts, Jr., “When Missing Data Are Not Missing: A New Approach to Evaluating Supplemental Homicide Report Imputation Strategies,” Criminology, Vol. 46, No. 4, 2008, pp. 841–870.
Wagenaar, Alexander C., Matthew J. Salois, and Kelli A. Komro, “Effects of Beverage Alcohol Price and Tax Levels on Drinking: A Meta‐Analysis of 1003 Estimates from 112 Studies,” Addiction, Vol. 104, No. 2, 2009, pp. 179–190.
Wallace, Lacey N., “Castle Doctrine Legislation: Unintended Effects for Gun Ownership?” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 11, No. 2, Fall 2014.
Wang, N., L. Liu, and J. E. Eck, “Analyzing Crime Displacement with a Simulation Approach,” Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, Vol. 41, No. 2, 2014, pp. 359–374.
Warburton, A. L., and J. P. Shepherd, “Tackling Alcohol Related Violence in City Centres: Effect of Emergency Medicine and Police Intervention,” Emergency Medicine Journal, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2006, pp. 12–17.
Watkins, Adam M., Beth M. Huebner, and Scott H. Decker, “Patterns of Gun Acquisition, Carrying, and Use Among Juvenile and Adult Arrestees: Evidence from a High‐Crime City,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 4, 2008, pp. 674–700.
Watkins, Adam M., and Alan J. Lizotte, “Does Household Gun Access Increase the Risk of Attempted Suicide? Evidence from a National Sample of Adolescents,” Youth and Society, Vol. 45, No. 3, 2013, pp. 324–346.
Webster, D., C. K. Crifasi, and J. S. Vernick, “Effects of the Repeal of Missouri’s Handgun Purchaser Licensing Law on Homicides,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 91, No. 2, 2014, pp. 293–302.
Webster, D. W., L. H. Freed, S. Frattaroli, and M. H. Wilson, “How Delinquent Youths Acquire Guns: Initial Versus Most Recent Gun Acquisitions,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 79, No. 1, 2002, pp. 60–69.
Webster, Daniel W., Alexander D. McCourt, Cassandra K. Crifasi, Marisa D. Booty, and Elizabeth A. Stuart, “Evidence Concerning the Regulation of Firearms Design, Sale, and Carrying on Fatal Mass Shootings in the United States,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 171–212.
Webster, Daniel W., and Marc Starnes, “Reexamining the Association Between Child Access Prevention Gun Laws and Unintentional Shooting Deaths of Children,” Pediatrics, Vol. 106, No. 6, 2000, pp. 1466–1469.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Maria T. Bulzacchelli, “Effects of State-Level Firearm Seller Accountability Policies on Firearm Trafficking,” Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, Vol. 86, No. 4, 2009, pp. 525–537.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Relationship Between Licensing, Registration, and Other Gun Sales Laws and the Source State of Crime Guns,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 7, 2001, pp. 184–189.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Effects of Maryland's Law Banning ‘Saturday Night Special’ Handguns on Homicides,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 155, No. 5, 2002, pp. 406–412.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, Emma E. McGinty, and Ted Alcorn, “Preventing the Diversion of Guns to Criminals Through Effective Firearm Sales Laws,” in Daniel W. Webster and Jon S. Vernick, eds., Reducing Gun Violence in America: Informing Policy with Evidence and Analysis, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013, pp. 109–121.
Webster, D. W., J. S. Vernick, A. M. Zeoli, and J. A. Manganello, “Association Between Youth-Focused Firearm Laws and Youth Suicides,” JAMA, Vol. 292, No. 5, 2004, pp. 594–601.
Webster, D. W., and G. J. Wintemute, “Effects of Policies Designed to Keep Firearms from High-Risk Individuals,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 36, 2015, pp. 21–37.
Weil, Douglas S., and Rebecca C. Knox, “Effects of Limiting Handgun Purchase on Interstate Transfer of Firearms,” JAMA, Vol. 275, No. 22, 1996, pp. 1759–1761.
Weisburd, D., S. Bushway, C. Lum, and S.-M. Yang, “Trajectories of Crime at Places: A Longitudinal Study of Street Segments in the City of Seattle,” Criminology, Vol. 42, No. 2, 2004, pp. 283–321.
Weisburd, D., and J. E. Eck, “What Can Police Do to Reduce Crime, Disorder, and Fear?” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 593, No. 1, 2004, pp. 42–65.
Welsh, B. C., and D. P. Farrington, “Public Area CCTV and Crime Prevention: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 26, 2009, pp. 716–745.
Wiebe, Douglas J., “Homicide and Suicide Risks Associated with Firearms in the Home: A National Case-Control Study,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 41, No. 6, 2003, pp. 771–782.
WikiArms, homepage, undated. As of December 11, 2020: https://www.wikiarms.com
Wilcox, P., and J. E. Eck, “Criminology of the Unpopular: Implications for Policy Aimed at Payday Lending Facilities,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2011, pp. 473–482.
Wintemute, Garen J., Ring of Fire: The Handgun Makers of Southern California, Sacramento, Calif.: Violence Prevention Research Program, 1994.
Wintemute, Garen J., Marian E. Betz, and Megan L. Ranney, “Yes, You Can: Physicians, Patients, and Firearms,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 165, No. 3, 2016, pp. 205–213.
Wintemute, G. J., D. Hemenway, D. Webster, G. Pierce, and A. A. Braga, “Gun Shows and Gun Violence: Fatally Flawed Study Yields Misleading Results,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 100, No. 10, 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
Wintemute, G. J., C. A. Parham, J. J. Beaumont, M. Wright, and C. Drake, “Mortality Among Recent Purchasers of Handguns,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 341, No. 21, 1999, pp. 1583–1589.
Wintemute, Garen J., Carrie A. Parham, Mona A. Wright, James J. Beaumont, and Christiana M. Drake, “Weapons of Choice: Previous Criminal History, Later Criminal Activity, and Firearm Preference Among Legally Authorized Young Adult Purchasers of Handguns,” Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, Vol. 44, No. 1, 1998, pp. 155–160.
Wintemute, Garen J., Veronica A. Pear, Julia P. Schleimer, Rocco Pallin, Sydney Sohl, Nicole Kravitz-Wirtz, and Elizabeth A. Tomsich, “Extreme Risk Protection Orders Intended to Prevent Mass Shootings: A Case Series,” Annals of Internal Medicine, August 2019.
Wooldridge, J. M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.
World Health Organization, Preventing Suicide: A Global Imperative, Geneva, 2014.
World Health Organization, World Health Organization Mortality Database, Geneva, 2017. As of October 13, 2017: http://apps.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality/causeofdeath_query/start.php
Wright, Alexandra, Katherine E. Smith, and Mark Hellowell, “Policy Lessons from Health Taxes: A Systematic Review of Empirical Studies,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2017.
Wright, James D., and Peter H. Rossi, Armed and Considered Dangerous: A Survey of Felons and Their Firearms, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1986.
Wright, M. A., and G. J. Wintemute, “Felonious or Violent Criminal Activity that Prohibits Gun Ownership Among Prior Purchasers of Handguns: Incidence and Risk Factors,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 69, No. 4, 2010, pp. 948–955.
Wright, M. A., G. J. Wintemute, and B. E. Claire, “People and Guns Involved in Denied and Completed Handgun Sales,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 11, No. 4, 2005, pp. 247–250.
Wright, M. A., G. J. Wintemute, and B. E. Claire, “Gun Suicide by Young People in California: Descriptive Epidemiology and Gun Ownership,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 43, No. 6, 2008, pp. 619–622.
Wright, Mona A., Garen J. Wintemute, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Effectiveness of Denial of Handgun Purchase to Persons Believed to Be at High Risk for Firearm Violence,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 89, No. 1, 1999, pp. 88–90.
Wu, Eric Q., Lizheng Shi, Howard Birnbaum, Teresa Hudson, and Ronald Kessler, “Annual Prevalence of Diagnosed Schizophrenia in the USA: A Claims Data Analysis Approach,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 36, No. 11, 2006, pp. 1535–1540.
Xue, Xiaonan, Mimi Y. Kim, Tao Wang, Mark H. Kuniholm, and Howard D. Strickler, “A Statistical Method for Studying Correlated Rare Events and Their Risk Factors,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2017, pp. 1416–1428.
Yablon, Alex, “Use of Red Flag Laws Varies Widely Among Local Police,” The Trace, April 23, 2019.
Zawitz, Marianne W., Guns Used in Crime, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ-148201, 1995.
Zeoli, April M., Shannon Frattaroli, Kelly Roskam, and Anastasia K. Herrera, “Removing Firearms from Those Prohibited from Possession by Domestic Violence Restraining Orders: A Survey and Analysis of State Laws,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2019, pp. 114–125.
Zeoli, April M., Alexander McCourt, Shani Buggs, Shannon Frattaroli, David Lilley, and Daniel W. Webster, “Analysis of the Strength of Legal Firearms Restrictions for Perpetrators of Domestic Violence and Their Associations with Intimate Partner Homicide,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 187, No. 11, 2018, pp. 2365–2371.
Zeoli, April M., and Jennifer K. Paruk, “Potential to Prevent Mass Shootings Through Domestic Violence Firearm Restrictions,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 129–145.
Zeoli, A. M., and D. W. Webster, “Effects of Domestic Violence Policies, Alcohol Taxes and Police Staffing Levels on Intimate Partner Homicide in Large U.S. Cities,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2010, pp. 90–95.
Zimmerman, Paul R., “The Deterrence of Crime Through Private Security Efforts: Theory and Evidence,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 37, 2014, pp. 66–75.
Zimring, Franklin E., “Firearms and Federal Law: The Gun Control Act of 1968,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 4, No. 1, 1975, pp. 133–198.
View the full project bibliography
Suggested Citation
Rosanna Smart and Terry L. Schell, "Mass Shootings in the United States," RAND Corporation, April 15, 2021. https://www.rand.org/research/gun-policy/analysis/essays/mass-shootings.html

Featured Researcher



Rosanna Smart
Economist


Rosanna Smart is an economist at the RAND Corporation and a member of the Pardee RAND Graduate School faculty. Her research is in applied microeconomics, with a focus on issues related to health behaviors, illicit markets, drug policy, programs to reduce crime and improve police operations and…


Explore Related Content



Gun Policy Expert-Opinion Tool


Gun Policy Research Review


Research Review Methodology


