In a globalized economy, organizations need to manage diverse pools of liquidity, fund cross-border trade, optimize working capital, and keep a close eye on risk. Banks traditionally support these priorities through a range of global transaction banking (GTB) services. However, amid rising competition from niche fintechs and digital banks, the market share of many incumbents is under threat. To respond, banks can use B2B application programming interfaces (APIs) to move closer in the value chain to their clients. These connective technologies offer clients easier access to GTB services from their own platforms and enable seamless interaction with third parties.Leading banks are focusing GTB integration efforts on products that promise most growth. According to a McKinsey survey, executives expect cash management and trade finance to be the growth engines over the next three years (Exhibit 1). This in the context of a business that already generates global annual revenues of $1 trillion.As executives consider how to make the most of growth opportunities, four major regulatory and technology trends are reshaping the GTB landscape:API platforms enable a flexible and iterative response to these trends. However, many banks have not invested sufficiently, and thus risk losing out to better-integrated competitors that can respond faster and more flexibly to client needs. The bottom line? Effective integration through B2B APIs should be a GTB priority.Traditionally, many banks have relied on technologies such as host-to-host file transfer, based on legacy web services, or secure file transfer protocol (SFTP), to integrate their GTB services with their clients’ systems. These solutions are predominantly used for cash management services such as payments, transfers, and cash pooling. However, while they tend to work well for single-step transactions, they struggle when transactions require conditional routing. This prevents them from being used for integration of more complex products.We see six major challenges around file-based integration: B2B API platforms help banks make GTB services available to their clients and partners as discrete operations. They typically work in a closed network, helping embed GTB functionalities seamlessly and securely into client workflows. In one example, a leading Indian bank integrated its B2B payments APIs with an online delivery startup, enabling real-time settlement and instant salary payments. Similarly, many companies are leveraging cash management APIs to automate invoice reconciliation workflows in their ERP systems.Emergence of open standards such Europe’s PSD2 and public goods infrastructure including India’s Unified Payments Interface are also driving adoption. Given the potential upsides, it is not surprising that over 85 percent of respondents to our executive survey say they plan to invest in cash management APIs in the next three years and close to 50 percent plan to expand trade finance APIs as part of their digital innovation agendas (Exhibit 2).A common challenge in building an API banking platform is balancing corporate requirements on process flow and flexibility with internal security and operational risk controls. A well-designed B2B API platform will address these competing priorities and create a culture of co-ownership with clients and partners, thereby spreading the cost of innovation and reducing time to market. Leading GTB players that have made the most progress tend to leverage five success factors:APIs should be seen as products with their own lifecycles and requiring the same commitment to development, testing, and marketing as any other innovation. With that in mind, there are two critical elements:Banks can choose a cloud-based or on-premise solution that is open-source or part of an enterprise suite, while ensuring they offer the following key capabilities: Individual application owners working on downstream systems can continue to own underlying business logic, error handing, logging, and enhancement. However, service contracts should be rewritten to make them RESTful and decomposed into microservices for easier maintenance and upgrades.Executives should extend risk and operational controls to API-based solutions, ensuring that the bank continues to meet its regulatory compliance obligations.By building out their ecosystems, banks can unlock innovation opportunities, expand their networks, and acquire new customers. An API taxonomy can help banks define ownership and governance rules. Banks should choose a taxonomy based on their own platform design. One common approach is to layer definitions as follows:Experience APIs should be owned by channel teams and process APIs by business owners. System APIs should be controlled by application owners. Another approach, used by one European bank, is to create a prioritization framework based on important use cases, in this case using umbrellas such as  and  The bank found that the approach helped drive internal innovation and monetize its APIs externally. Successful GTB fintechs have achieved unicorn status (that is, valuations in excess of $1 billion) by providing best-in-class services coupled with a full suite of API functionalities, and integrating these into client systems. Forward-looking global banks, meanwhile, are investing their GTB IT budgets in technology enhancements, including API platforms. Banks that have not yet taken steps must therefore act urgently to enhance their own API propositions and partner with clients to ensure they keep pace and remain relevant in the fast-evolving landscape. McKinsey Global Transaction Banking Survey, September 2019 Representational state transfer.