
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Hong Kong British Nationals (Overseas) welcome programme – information for local authorities
  

  
  
  
      
  Information for local authorities and others who are working with British National (Overseas) (BN(O)) status holders arriving from Hong Kong via the UK government’s BN(O) route.  

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities  and Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government

      
      Published
      8 April 2021
      Last updated
      
        29 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction

        
        
          
MHCLG’s Hong Kong UK Welcome Programme – summary

        
        
          Funding

        
        
          Targeted support funds (ESOL and destitution – England only)

        
        
          Strategic Migration Partnerships (SMPs) and VCSE (UK funding)

        
        
          
BN(O) arrivals (UK wide)

        
        
          Governance

        
        
          Integration – what’s worked before

        
        
          Policy specific issues

        
        
          No Recourse to Public Funds (NRPF) (UK wide)

        
        
          Proof of status (UK wide)

        
        
          Housing (England only)

        
        
          Employment (UK wide)

        
        
          Education (England only)

        
        
          Health care (UK wide)

        
        
          Hate crime (England only)

        
        
          Security (UK-wide)

        
        
          Resources

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Introduction

This resource aims to provide answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs) and information for local authorities and others who are working with British National (Overseas) (BN(O)) status holders arriving from Hong Kong via the UK government’s BN(O)  route. It provides information on the  £43.1 million welcome programme put in place to support BN(O) status holders and their family members, including £5.8 million which has been provided for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

See further information and associated application process on the BN(O) route which launched on 31 January 2021.

This resource will be regularly updated, as a repository for good practice and learning. Should you have any comments, suggestions, useful materials and/or case studies to share (or additional FAQs that you think should be included here) please email: hongkong@communities.gov.uk.

Supporting new arrivals

Local authorities are already playing a key role in working with local partners and communities to ensure BN(O) status holders are welcomed and given help and support to successfully integrate in their new communities.

Many local authorities and their partners in the Voluntary, Community and Social Enterprise (VCSE) sector will have extensive experience of welcoming new arrivals to live and work in their area. While BN(O) status holders will, in some instances, require specific support, we recognise the wealth of local experience in delivering successful integration programmes that already exists – we have therefore provided links to best practice and resources available in the section ‘Supporting Integration – what’s worked before’.

Many thanks to those that used this experience to inform this programme. We want to continue to work with you and with communities as the programme develops. More information on how we will engage is detailed below.

Please note that some of this information applies to England only. Where this is the case, it has been highlighted under each section.


MHCLG’s Hong Kong UK Welcome Programme – summary

A new immigration route opened on 31 January 2021, providing British National (Overseas) (BN(O)) status holders from Hong Kong and their dependants with the opportunity to come to the UK to live, study and work, on a pathway to citizenship. 

This new route reflects the UK’s historic and moral commitment to those people of Hong Kong who chose to retain their ties to the UK by taking up BN(O) status at the point of Hong Kong’s handover to China in 1997.
  
The Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) is leading delivery of a £43.1 million HMG funded national ‘Welcome Programme’ to support BN(O) status holders and their families to help them to successfully settle in their new communities.  

 The Welcome Programme has the following elements:  


  English language and destitution support: funding is available for local authorities to support BN(O) status holders and their family members in need, and has also been provided to deliver similar activity in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.  
  An online resource providing all those on the BN(O) route with information, on how to access services and understand life in the UK. Similar resources are being produced in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales.   
  12 new Welcome Hubs, across the whole of the UK, to prepare for the arrival of BN(O) status holders and their families, ensuring they have their own ‘welcome’ in place and local areas have capacity to integrate the new arrivals into communities. This is using the existing infrastructure of the Strategic Migration Partnerships.   
  National and Regional Voluntary, Community and Social Enterprise (VCSE) funds to bolster community led activities, from befriending to employability support.    
  As part of the national VCSE fund, MHCLG in collaboration with the Department for Education (DfE), will support the development of dedicated Hong Kong educational resources for schools so that they can teach young people about our historic connection and commitment to Hong Kong and its people, and celebrate the contribution of the Hong Kong-British Diaspora to the UK.  
  Funding is also being provided to deliver a hate crime reporting service for BN(O) status holders and all other people of East and South-East Asian descent, to deliver hate crime reporting services and a hate crime helpline and website.


The aims of the ‘Welcome Programme’ are to:  


  Enable BN(O) status holders and their dependants to fully contribute to life in the UK, both economically and socially, enriching our society. 
  Provide support to both resident communities and BN(O) status holders and their families to feel safe and welcome, as well as ensuring any hate crime is tackled in a timely way.  
  Allow BN(O) status holders and their families to feel fully part of British society, able to mix confidently with people of all backgrounds and provide a positive contribution to the UK and the areas in which they settle  
  Ensure that any instances of destitution and underemployment in the BN(O) status holder cohort is minimised and addressed through effective support


Funding

What are your plans for the provision of future funding for the Hong Kong British Nationals (Overseas) Welcome Programme?


  The current funding is for this financial year 2021/22. We will be piloting a range of approaches to supporting BN(O) status holders, working with local partners including local authorities, SMPs and the VCSE.
  As more BN(O) status holders move to the UK, further data will be gathered on their needs and characteristics. We will keep our plans under review for 2021/22 and future financial years.


Why is the government providing funding for a BN(O) UK welcome programme?


  
    Previous programmes run by MHCLG, such as the Controlling Migration Fund and the Syrian Resettlement Programme, have demonstrated the importance of putting in place a support package for new migrants to enable them to settle into their new communities more effectively.
  
  
    If new migrants can integrate with the settled community, speak English, use services and be economically active this significantly reduces pressures on local services (including housing where people are at risk of destitution) and minimises negative impacts on community cohesion and tensions.
  


Targeted support funds (ESOL and destitution – England only)

What do you mean by ESOL and destitution support?


  Local authorities in England can apply to MHCLG’s £30.7 million targeted funding where they have provided support to those on the BN(O) route who need help with English language or are destitute or at risk of destitution.


Can local authorities claim for support provided to people who are not BN(O) status holders or on the BN(O) route but are from Hong Kong?


  The funding is available for support provided to BN(O) status holders and their dependents who are on the BN(O) route.
  It does not cover those who have BN(O) status but have entered the UK through other immigration routes, such as through the points-based system, the youth mobility scheme, student visas or as a visitor. Similarly, the funding cannot be claimed for support provided to those currently seeking asylum in the UK.
  It also does not cover individuals who have been granted ‘Leave Outside the Rules’ until they have made a successful application to the BN(O) route.


What do you mean by destitution support?


  It will be for each local authority to decide what assistance can be provided to BN(O) status holders and their families based upon an individual assessment of a person or household’s status, circumstances and support needs. Where a local authority considers that assistance is appropriate, the local authority should satisfy itself that it is acting within the law.


What do you mean by supporting access to ESOL?


  It will be for each local authority to decide what assistance can be provided to those BN(O) status holders and their families who require support to learn English or improve their English language ability.
  The ambition is for local authorities making claims for this funding to build upon existing ESOL infrastructure in place within their local area - through collaborating and working with community groups and ESOL providers already established within their local area.


How much funding is available?


  Funding of up to £800 per adult is available to support access to English language classes for those on the BN(O) route.
  Funding of up to £2,720 per BN(O) household is available for destitution support.


Which local authorities can access the targeted support funds?


  The funding can be claimed by all county councils, unitary authorities, London boroughs and metropolitan boroughs. Where lower tier councils are providing some elements of the support, they will need to agree arrangements for claiming the funding with the local upper tier council, while ensuring that the limits for English language and destitution support are not exceeded.


When will local authorities be given advice on how they can access this funding?


  Guidance was issued to local authority chief executives on 29 July. It has also been shared with Strategic Migration Partnerships and welcome hubs.
  Funds will be allocated on a quarterly retrospective basis, which should give local authorities certainty on what level of support should be given to BN(O) status holders in their areas.
  We have worked with local authorities and the LGA to develop the guidance on clear eligibility criteria for this funding and put in place a streamlined process to access the funding.


Would funding upfront be a better option?


  As those on the BN(O) route can choose to settle in any part of the UK, providing upfront funding to areas based on our projections could lead to some areas missing out on funding to support any future influxes of BN(O) status holders. To address this risk we are providing retrospective funding to local authorities.


How often will local authorities receive retrospective payments, and does this mean that local authorities have to pay upfront for BN(O) support?


  Payments for BN(O) support will be quarterly on a retrospective  basis as set out in the guidance. If we provided funding upfront this may mean that some areas that provide ESOL or destitution support may miss out on it.
  Local authorities may have to pay for support upfront for BN(O) status holders in their areas, but the guidance explains the eligibility criteria for this funding. This should give local authorities certainty on what level of support should be given to BN(O) status holders in their areas.


How do you know that the amounts allocated for ESOL and destitution support are enough to support BN(O) status holders?


  All costs are based on existing local authority programmes/support run by MHCLG.
  We expect that local authorities will use these funds to build upon existing provision, where available, and that they will work with the Welcome hubs to deliver support where appropriate.
  We will keep these amounts under review based on further data which will be gathered on the needs and characteristics of BN(O) status holders.


Will local authorities have to provide evidence to support claims when spending these funds?


  The claim form for this funding asks the local authority to confirm that it has seen evidence that the individual or household requires funding. We have worked with the LGA and local authorities to agree the format of this.
  It is important that MHCLG and partners across government work together to understand any themes, innovation or good practice emerging that could help inform policy developments in this space. In addition to evidencing claims, which will provide monitoring data as to how many individuals have been supported through the scheme and providing forecasts based on contact with BN(O) status holders, we will ask local authorities to complete a light-touch appraisal of the impact of the support this fund has provided.
  We would also expect that any local authority receiving this funding would contribute to best practice or similar learning / knowledge sharing exercises.


What if there’s more demand than expected?


  The available funding is based on current estimates of demand and will be kept under review.


Targeted Support Funding for ESOL (England only)

Can local authorities ‘pool’ funding for ESOL to respond to varying levels of support/need?


  No. We are not allowing ‘pooling’ of funds as we don’t know the level of demand or support needs of BN(O) status holders and adult dependants. We will monitor demand closely to assess whether this position is effective and practical and to consider any additional requirements for future years.


Can the funding be used to deliver online resources to complement face to face ESOL provision?


  Local authorities and providers have been forced to consider the way learning is delivering during the Covid-19 pandemic.  Many are embracing digital technology to enhance the way things are done including increasing digital access. If the online resources contribute to the delivery of the learning and are part of the provision then local authorities can reclaim the costs for this up to the limit.


Can local authorities use the funding to pay for English language classes delivered by a private provider?


  It will be for the local authority to decide on the most appropriate delivery arrangements and range of providers within a local area that best meets the language requirements of BN(O) status holder and their family members.


What if there is insufficient provision available to meet demand?


  Where existing provision is not sufficient to meet local need, we would encourage local authorities to consider what they can do to boost provision. This could include working collaboratively across boundaries or in conjunction with the Welcome Hub network to take advantage of available provision, or to procure new provision where required. Additionally, local authorities may wish to connect with their regional SMP ESOL coordinator for support and advice on ESOL.


Is the funding aimed at a specific type of ESOL provision?


  
BN(O) status holders and their family members will have differing needs and level of English language and literacy so there is no one singular uniform activity that this funding should be used for. Instead, the local authority funding requirements should be informed by the nature of existing local provision and by each adult learner’s specific circumstances and requirements.


What provision is being made for young people who require English language support?


  This funding does not cover the costs of providing English language provision for under-16s, as local authorities have a statutory duty to provide sufficient school places for children of school age (5-16 years old).
  Where a school age child requires English language support, this will be provided by schools – with funding through the National Funding Formula for schools, which includes an English as an additional language (EAL) component. The EAL factor is the means through which state-funded schools in England are allocated additional funding for pupils who are recorded in the school census as having entered state education in England during the last three years, and whose first language is not English. The funding equates to £550 per eligible primary pupil and £1,485 per eligible secondary pupil in 2021-22. Schools have flexibility over how they use their overall funding to support EAL pupils in developing proficiency in English, as they are best placed to understand and respond to the specific needs of their pupils.
  Children of BN(O) status holders who are aged 16,17 and 18 coming to UK with a right to reside in UK would be eligible under ESFA funding rules (regulation 40). It will be for individual educational institutions to assess the needs of each student when deciding on an appropriate course of study, and those with lower prior English language skills/attainment should expect to be placed on study programmes that concentrate on need to achieve expected base levels in English, and mathematics where needed.


Will local authorities be able to reclaim the costs of providing creche/childcare provision where required for ESOL provision?


  We recognise that some learners face certain barriers to participation in learning such as caring responsibilities, particularly for women who tend to take on childcare responsibilities. Where a learner requires creche/childcare provision, local authorities should consider practical solutions supporting learners. Where possible support should be provided as part of the provision and additional costs may be reclaimed, subject to the limit per learner.  Further information is required as part of the claim form.


Can I claim for associated costs such as exam fees, initial learner assessments etc?


  Where possible this should be built into the overall provision and claimed up to the limit.


Does the limit cover a fixed period of learning?


  The limit can cover any duration of learning as long as it covers the cost of one learner for one course for the first year of the funding.


Strategic Migration Partnerships (SMPs) and VCSE (UK funding)

What is the role of SMPs?


  SMPs coordinate and support local delivery of national programmes in asylum and refugee schemes, as well as agreed regional and devolved migration priorities. SMPs work with stakeholders in the statutory, voluntary, private and community sectors to provide a strategic leadership, advisory and coordination function on migration in their regions and nations, ensuring a coordinated approach to migration and the sharing of relevant information and good practice. The hosting arrangements for each SMP may differ depending on regional and national structures.
  There are 12 SMP partnerships across England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland.
  SMPs will play an integral role in the delivery of the Hong Kong BN(O) Welcome Programme, coordinating the welcome of BN(O) status holders into their new communities with local authorities and the VCSE.
  The UK Welcome hubs will provide a range of support, based on need and the expected number of arrivals in each area, this may include:
    
      working closely with partners to share resources, review requests for support and, where appropriate, assisting with joint commissioning between areas.
      communicating and raising awareness of the department’s wider BN(O) Welcome Programme throughout regional networks.
      providing constructive feedback to the department on issues and challenges that cannot be resolved locally.
      acting as a critical friend to the department facilitating continuous improvement in community cohesion and support for local areas.
      capturing and sharing aggregated data and intelligence with MHCLG, supporting the department’s work to better understand the volume, destination and needs of the BN(O) status holders, flagging any community challenges and issues to the department.
      acting as a conduit for the sharing of information and evidence between central government, devolved administrations, local authorities, local partners and the existing SMP network, including regular reporting on the volumes, location, characteristics and needs of BN(O) status holders encountered by their Welcome Hub.
    
  
  SMPs will have a role to play in assisting the department in the VCSE regional funding by promoting, co-ordinating and undertaking an initial assessment of applications from relevant VCSE organisations, encouraging relevant VCSE organisations to make applications, co-ordinating those received and undertaking an initial assessment as per the guidance for the VCSE fund.


Why have you weighted funding for SMPs and VCSE groups?


  We know that existing Hong Kong communities are spread widely throughout the UK, with bigger communities in larger cities. We expect BN(O) status holders to settle in a similar way.
  On this basis we have weighted funding against the locations (modelling projects) where BN(O) status holders and their family members are likely to settle.
  Modelling projects arrivals across the UK and on this basis the whole of the UK will receive some level of funding to support their activity.
  Plans for welcoming BN(O) status holders and working with local community groups will be different in each area, with those with greatest demand receiving the larger proportion of funding.


Local authorities work closely with the voluntary, community and social enterprise (VCSE), what support will be available for these organisations?


  We know the VCSE sector plays an important role in delivering local services and they have extensive experience in supporting the integration of migrant groups.
  As part of the Hong Kong BN(O) Welcome Programme being announced, national and local voluntary and community groups will have access to funding to support the local and national welcome and to enable BN(O) status holders to access services, for example, finding a job and registering with a GP and putting in place befriending and support groups.


In The New Plan for Immigration the Home Secretary committed to developing a package of tailored integration support such as language training, skills development and work placements to new arrivals build their lives in the UK.  Could there be scope for one integration package for all new migrants?


  Our new points-based system ensures migrants coming to the UK have the necessary skills, job or study offer, and funds to succeed.
  This government recognises the importance of helping those who need it and that is why we are committed to ensuring that BN(O) status holders and their family members have the tools they need to settle into their new communities more effectively.
  Whilst recognising the specific needs and characteristics of different groups, we will work across government and with our partners to align our approach, recognising the wealth of experience that local areas have of delivering successful integration programmes.
  The structures being put in place at a national and local level will support this joined-up approach.



BN(O) arrivals (UK wide)

Where will BN(O) status holders settle in the UK?


  The government’s impact assessment estimated that between 123,000 and 153,000 BN(O) status holders and their dependants could take up the route in its first year, with between 258,000 and 322,000 over 5 years – these numbers are estimates and may change.
  There are current limitations on conducting research in Hong Kong to understand the drivers of migration or the needs of BN(O) status holders.
  The Hong Kong BN(O) Welcome Programme has been designed with the limitations to the data in mind and will provide support to local authorities to manage a range of levels of influx.


Do we know where BN(O) status holders will settle when they arrive?


  Individuals on the BN(O) route can choose to settle in any location across the UK.
  We know that existing Hong Kong communities are spread widely throughout the UK, with bigger communities in larger cities. We expect BN(O) status holders and their families to settle in a similar way.
  As more BN(O) status holders start to arrive in the UK, we will have a better understanding from working with local authorities and SMPs of where BN(O) status holders settle.
  The Hong Kong BN(O) Welcome Programme has been designed to provide support to local areas to manage a range of levels of arrivals.


Will local authorities have access to real time data to help plan for new arrivals?


  We are working across government to bring together available data to inform planning at national and local levels.
  To ensure local authorities can meet the needs of BN(O) status holders in their areas, funding for ESOL and destitution is available to local authorities in England on a retrospective basis. Guidance was issued to local authorities on 29 July.
  This should give local authorities certainty on what level of support should be given to BN(O) status holders in their area.
  As more BN(O) status holders start to arrive in the UK, we will have a better understanding from working with local authorities and SMPs of where BN(O) status holders settle.


How have you supported the Local Resilience Forums to plan for BN(O) status holder arrivals?


  
MHCLG’s Resilience & Recovery Directorate (RED) have engaged all 38 Local Resilience Forums (LRFs) in England with regards to the development of proportionate local plans for the contingency planning scenario set out by Cabinet Office.
  RED continues to monitor LRF preparedness for an influx of BN(O) status holders.


Governance

What structures are being put in place to consider and manage potential impacts for national and local government?


  We are putting in place a Cross-Whitehall Inter-Ministerial Group for BN(O)s, alongside a national Taskforce with representatives from local government, civil society and BN(O) representative groups.
  Alongside these groups, we intend to establish a number of task and finish groups that will undertake deep-dives into specific issues to help us better understand the issues affecting the BN(O) cohort and impacts on local government.
  In the meantime, please do contact: hongkong@communities.gov.uk with your views on potential impacts and also any good practice on your plans for supporting new arrivals.


Integration – what’s worked before

Early intervention


  
    Local authorities and SMPs have extensive experience in managing demand around migration or refugee events and supporting individuals to have the best start to life in the UK. You will be able to draw on previous programmes in considering how to support BN(O) status holders and their families and the following is our top tips from central government’s experiences working with local areas on migration/refugee projects.
  
  
    Resettlement and integration schemes are designed to provide protection, reduce barriers to service access and in extreme cases limit the risk of destitution on the basis that early intervention can address language and skills gaps, orientate new arrivals help access other support to help ease the transition into housing and employment and most importantly support positive integration outcomes. At a national level we are releasing materials to signpost BN(O) status holders from when they arrive in the country, and UK Welcome hubs will also be developing plans for orientation.
  
  
    Programmes such as the Controlling Migration Fund, Syrian Resettlement Scheme and the Asylum Support pilot scheme show that early intervention is found to support the integration of new migrants and reduce the pressures on public services.
  
  
    Effective approaches include: designing area-specific content on local services and individual rights and responsibilities; providing information through trusted intermediaries (such as volunteers or peer mentors) and utilising known local venues (such as Children’s Centres or community centres), and information combined with direct support. We are providing local funds to support VCSE activities across the country.
  
  
    Activities that aim to increase the knowledge and skills of new arrivals generally show positive results beyond the individual beneficiary as many will often pass on and share knowledge gained with their wider community.
  
  
    Local authorities will likely explore jointly commissioning services with other local authorities in their region. This may provide cost efficiencies, and enable specialist providers to provide uniform, good quality service for new arrivals across the region. In this scenario, joint commissioning will also require coordination, and UK Welcome hubs will be able to assist.
  
  
    There can be high levels of housing insecurity among migrant communities, due to a lack of understanding of their housing rights and responsibilities, as well as barriers to accessing secure housing. This is likely to be no different for some BN(O) status holders who may not have a good grasp of what housing is available, their housing rights or the means to secure any form of housing. In the most extreme cases, where destitution is likely, financial support is being provided through our programme for local authorities to mitigate against the risk of homelessness and reduce any further pressures on housing and social services.
  
  
    Local authorities will be familiar with some of the common external barriers to facilitating access to services which certain migrant groups can encounter and impact on their ability to settle those include immigration legislation restrictions (such as No Recourse to Public Funds conditions), the time needed to set up bank accounts and access benefits and wider housing shortages in local areas limiting the availability of permanent housing options. Factoring in these issues to local planning will ensure that services are ready to respond effectively and help reduce some of the wider impacts on services.
  


Community cohesion


  
    Local authorities already have great expertise in bringing communities together and existing resources to ensure people are welcome in local areas. Whilst we recognise BN(O) status holders may have different needs to other migrant groups there is a great deal of learning and resources available on how to support integration and promote community cohesion.
  
  
    Learning from the Syrian Resettlement Scheme has shown that good community relations can be encouraged and facilitated by providing opportunities for migrant groups and local residents to interact and get to know one another as neighbours in the same locality. Through our national and local VCSE funds we will provide extensive support for local residents to get involved in the programme.
  
  
    Integration and mixing should not be forced, but new arrivals to the UK can struggle to find opportunities to interact and spend meaningful time with British people and other UK residents beyond their own migrant community.
  
  
    Each local area will be different, and each place will have different opportunities and community development projects already in place. The funding for the UK Welcome hubs offers the opportunity to initiate and financially support initiatives that will directly encourage BN(O) status holders and their families to gain a better understanding of their local environment and for the wider community to get used to this group in their everyday lives.
  


Policy specific issues

English language (England only)

English language is an important part of successful integration, what support will be available for BN(O) status holders who can’t speak English or require classes?


  English language support is being prioritised as it is linked to employability and poor English ability can create a burden on local services.
  Guidance issued to local authorities on 29 July sets out how they can claim for the costs of providing support with English language for BN(O) status holders who need it.


Why can BN(O) status holders not access the Adult Education Budget (AEB)?


  Those on the BN(O) route will be eligible to access ESOL courses funded through the Adult Education Budget (AEB) when they have been ordinarily resident in the UK for 3 years.  This is in line with the residency eligibility outlined in the current AEB funding rules.


No Recourse to Public Funds (NRPF) (UK wide)

Why do you impose NRPF conditions on migrant visa routes?


  It is a well-established principle that migrants coming to the UK should be able to maintain and support themselves and their families without recourse to public funds.
  These restrictions are an important plank of immigration policy designed to assure the public that controlled immigration brings real benefits to the UK, rather than costs to the public purse.


Are BN(O) status holders subject to the NRPF condition?


  Those on the BN(O)  route will have a ‘no recourse to public funds’ (NRPF) condition attached to their leave. This means they will not be able to access benefits and services classed as public funds which are set out in s115 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and at paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules. They will, however, have permission to work and study. Those on the BN(O)  route are entitled to access a state funded school for their children if they live in the UK.
  Following a recent change to the immigration rules those on the BN(O)  route will be able to apply for a change of conditions to have their NRPF condition lifted in the case of destitution or where there is a risk of imminent destitution, a risk to the welfare of a child or if the applicant is experiencing exceptional financial circumstances.
  Applicants can apply for a change of conditions if:
    
      The applicant’s financial circumstances have changed since being given permission to stay in the UK and they are no longer able to provide food or housing for themselves or their family.
      The applicant’s child is at risk because of their very low income.
    
  


What is considered destitution in relation to the lifting of NRPF?


  In line with other immigration routes across the system that allow for a change of conditions, a person is considered destitute if:
    
      they do not have adequate accommodation or any means of obtaining it (whether or not their other essential living needs are met).
      they have adequate accommodation or the means of obtaining it but cannot meet their other essential living needs.
      they are at risk of destitution if either or both of the above are imminent.
    
  


What is the process for BN(O) status holders who need to apply for a change of condition?


  Applicants who wish to apply for a change of conditions can do so online via the following link: Change of Conditions (visas-immigration.service.gov.uk).


Why can those on the BN(O) route apply to lift this condition when this isn’t necessarily available to other migrants?


  This is a generous offer to BN(O) status holders and their family members which reflects the UK’s historic and moral commitment to those people of Hong Kong who chose to retain their ties to the UK by taking up BN(O) status at the point of Hong Kong’s handover to China in 1997.
  This route was set up following China’s passing of the National Security Law. This new law significantly impacts the rights and freedoms of the people of Hong Kong. Since the situation that BN(O) status holders find themselves in has changed, it is right that their rights and entitlements in the UK change too.
  This route will not set a precedent. It is a proportionate response to the situation which has arisen, in order to offer a choice that affords long-term safety and stability for these individuals and their families.


If there is a delay between BN(O) status holders applying to have the NRPF condition lifted, and the application being granted who will support them?


  Local authorities that provide support to BN(O) status holders and their families who are destitute or at risk of destitution can apply to MHCLG’s £30.7 million targeted support funding. Guidance on this was issued to local authorities on 29 July.


What work is being done to ensure BN(O) status holders don’t fall into destitution?


  Those who apply for the BN(O) route will need to be able to show that they can support themselves and their family members in the UK for six months.
  It is a well-established principle that migrants coming to the UK should be able to maintain and support themselves and their families without posing a burden onto the welfare system.
  The government is making a generous offer to BN(O) status holders and their family members, who in turn will be expected to be self-sufficient and contribute to UK society.
  Work is taking place across government, alongside civil society groups and others to support the effective integration of BN(O) status holders arriving in the UK.


Proof of status (UK wide)

How can those on the BN(O) route prove their immigration status?


  Once a BN(O) visa has been granted, depending on how the application was made, the BN(O) status holder will either be able to view immigration status information online or receive a sticker (called a ‘vignette’) that goes in their passport.
  If a BN(O) status holder has a vignette, they have to collect a biometric residence permit (BRP) after they arrive. They must do this before the vignette sticker expires or within 10 days of arriving in the UK, whichever is later.
  The BRP will include:
    
      name, date and place of birth
      fingerprints and a photo of the status holder’s face (this is the biometric information)
      immigration status and any conditions of the status holder’s stay whether the status holder can access public funds, or whether they can work and study
    
  
  If the BN(O) status holder applied for the BN(O) route online using the ‘UK Immigration: ID Check’ app to scan their BNO, HKSAR or EEA passport, they will not receive a vignette and will not need to collect a BRP. Instead, they will receive a digital immigration status which they will be able to view online. The BN(O) status holder can also use the online service to share their immigration status information with others, for example, employers or universities. See further information on immigration status

  The online status will show:
    
      name, date and place of birth
      immigration status and any conditions of on the status holder’s stay
      dates the visa is valid (start date and end date)
    
  


Do BN(O) status holders need a National Insurance number to start work?


  
BN(O) status holders will be able to look for and start work without a National Insurance number if they can prove they can work in the UK.
  
BN(O) status holders can go online at Prove your right to work to an employer which allows them to authorise an employer to access data to prove they have the right to work in the UK.
  Employers are required to conduct mandatory Right to Work checks on all prospective employees. Having a National Insurance number is not part of these checks, and the possession of a National Insurance number does not prove that an individual has a right to work.


Housing (England only)

Some local areas already have difficulties with housing supply, will local authorities be expected to provide accommodation to BN(O) status holders?


  The BN(O) route is a generous offer for BN(O) status holders and their dependants, who in turn will be expected to be self-sufficient and contribute to UK society.
  To be eligible for the BN(O) route, applicants must prove they are able to sustain themselves and their families in the UK for six months, and in every case, an initial grant of leave will have no recourse to public funds. BN(O) status holders can apply for settled status after five years but in the meantime, they are not eligible to access most public funds. See section named ‘No Recourse to Public Funds (NRPF) (UK wide)’.
  Local authorities may be expected to provide some form of support in managing tenancies, assessing any eligibility for local deposit schemes and understanding rights and entitlements to housing and welfare support, where that may be appropriate. The targeted support funding factors in the potential impacts on homelessness, housing and translation services demands.


Will BN(O) status holders who have successfully applied to have the no recourse to public funds (NRPF) condition lifted have access to social housing?


  The Housing Act 1996 provides that a local housing authority shall not allocate housing to persons from abroad who are not eligible (s.160ZA(1)(a)). 
  There are two types of person from abroad for these purposes:
    
      persons who are subject to immigration control who will not be eligible for an allocation of housing accommodation (social housing) unless they come within a class of person prescribed in regulations made by the Secretary of State (s.160ZA(2) of the 1996 Act)
      other persons from abroad who will be eligible for an allocation of social housing unless they come within a class of person prescribed as ineligible by virtue of regulations made by the Secretary of State under s.160ZA(4).
    
  
  In June regulations came into force to ensure that people from Hong Kong who are on the Home Office’s British National (Overseas) bespoke immigration route and have their no recourse to public funds condition lifted due to destitution are also eligible for social housing and homelessness assistance.


Employment (UK wide)

The BN(O) route does not require BN(O) status holders to secure a job offer prior to arriving in the UK – does that mean local authorities are expected to support their access to employment?


  We know that those on the BN(O) route will want to find and secure jobs as soon as they arrive. This guarantees an income and provides opportunities to integrate and mix with people from different backgrounds.
  There are many benefits of enabling new migrant arrivals to access employment at their appropriate skill level relatively soon after arrival in the UK, both for their own wellbeing and for the wider community.
  Employment support can assist in understanding and navigating the UK job market, transferring existing skills and qualifications, and identifying relevant training and study options.
  Funding for national and local VCSE activity can be used to develop specific employability support for the BN(O) arrivals – this will be dependent on local need.


How can local authorities/civil society groups support BN(O) arrivals to understand and navigate the UK job market?


  UK Welcome hubs, Local authorities and VCSE may want to consider how local employment support can be organised for newly arrived Hong Kong BN(O) status holders to assist in understanding and navigating the UK job market, transferring existing skills and qualifications, and identifying relevant training and study options.


Education (England only)

What are you doing about school places?


  The dependants of BN(O) status holders from Hong Kong who settle in the UK have a right to attend school in the UK. Local authorities hold the statutory duty to provide sufficient school places.
  Any BN(O) status holders who already live in the UK or who moves to live in the UK under the new visa scheme can apply for a school place for their children. Schools are not permitted to refuse any children a place on the grounds of their nationality or immigration status.
  The Department for Education (DfE) has contacted all local authority school admission contacts, to alert them to the need to review their plans and to ask them to inform DfE if they see any unusual spikes in in-year admission applications from Hong Kong.
  DfE is surveying LA admission officers termly to obtain information on where BN(O) status holders are settling and applying for school places in order to alert pupil place advisers to areas where there may be pressure on school places.
  Pupil Place Planning (PPP) advisors have integrated conversations on planning for BN(O) status holders as part of their routine engagement on sufficiency. Pupil planning advisors can be contacted at: Advisers.PPP@education.gov.uk, this contact was included in the MHCLG letters sent to local authorities in January.


How can BN(O) families apply for a school place?


  Information for parents on how to apply for a school place can be found in the Hong Kong BN(O) welcome pack

  If children will be aged 4 by the following September, parents would normally apply to their local authority, by the national closing date for applications for state-funded primary schools (15 January) for a place in reception for the following September.
  If children are aged 10, parents would normally apply to their local authority, by the national closing date for applications for state-funded secondary schools (31 October) for a place in year 7 for the following September.
  If the family does not arrive in the UK by these deadlines or they are applying for a place for their child in another year group, they should contact their local authority about the availability of places and where they might apply for them.
  Parents should apply directly to the school should they want an independent school place.
  They will normally have to pay fees for an independent school but cannot be charged for admission to, or education at, a state-funded school.


What about pre-school aged children?


  Information for BN(O) parents on how they might be able to access free hours of childcare for children aged 2 to 4 can be found on the get childcare website

  DfE early years team is in contact with early years local authority leads, with information on early years entitlements for BN(O) status holders, and will work with local authorities through established regular check-ins to understand and help manage any increase in demand entitlements.


Will BN(O) status holders and their family members benefitting from this route have to pay international student fees for higher education?


  As the policy currently stands, BN(O) status holders will be international students until they complete their pathway to settlement.
  To qualify for home fee status in the UK, a person must have settled status or a recognised connection to the UK. There are also requirements associated with ordinary residence in the UK.
  Subject to meeting the normal eligibility requirements, BN(O) status holders will be able to qualify for home fee status once they have acquired settled status in the UK. This also applies to any dependants.


What advice is there on comparability of qualifications obtained in Hong Kong?


  The UK European Network Information Centre (UK ENIC, and formerly UK NARIC) provides expert advice on behalf of the UK government on the comparability of international qualifications, including those from Hong Kong to UK qualifications.
  UK ENIC has conducted research into the comparable levels of the years of study that precede the full completion of the HKDSE and are therefore able to issue Statements of Comparability, despite the formal exit qualification not having been completed, to help guide schools and colleges on A level enrolment and 16-19 funding exemptions.


Health care (UK wide)

Will BN(O) status holders have access to health care?


  Those on the BN(O) route will have access to healthcare free at the point of use on the same terms as British residents, once they have paid the Immigration Health Surcharge (IHS) and their application has been granted.
  
BN(O) status holders and their families may require some assistance to register with a GP and access mental health/specialist services, particularly where they have lower levels of English ability.


Hate crime (England only)

What can local authorities do to prevent hate crime?


  The British-Hong Kong diaspora has made a huge contribution to this country over many decades. They are hugely valued and like other communities should never be subject to prejudice and discrimination of any kind.
  To make sure that any prejudice or discrimination is dealt with quickly, we will set up a new third-party hate crime reporting service for this community - and for all other people of East and Southeast Asian descent. Find more information about this service.
  The Home Office also regularly engages with the National Police Chiefs Council and Civil Society partners to ensure police forces are reassuring communities and encouraging reporting of hate crime. The Home Office and its partners will take necessary action against those who commit such crimes in order to protect these individuals.
  There is further information available on the government’s campaign on hate crime and how to report hate crime.


Security (UK-wide)

Is the government planning to conduct background checks on those applying under this visa route?


  The existing provisions in the Immigration Rules will apply in relation to criminality and other adverse behaviour.
  When applying to the BN(O) route, applicants must have no serious criminal convictions, have not otherwise engaged in behaviour which the UK government deems not conducive to the public good, or be subject to other general grounds for refusal set out in the Immigration Rules.
  We recognise that every case has its individual merits however, and caseworkers have flexibility within the existing Immigration Rules to ensure that those who have custodial sentences for crimes which are not recognised as such in the UK would not be automatically refused on the BN(O) route.


Resources

We have highlighted resources below that local authorities may find helpful when considering their integration plans. Further resources will be added over time:


  
    LGA’s guidance on community cohesion
  
  
    Home Office indicators framework provides practical ways to design more effective strategies, monitor services and evaluate integration interventions
  
  
    Syrian Resettlement Scheme – a guide for local authorities
  
  
    Resettling refugees: support after the first year - a guide for local authorities
  
  
    The Migration Observatory has published a Q&A on the BN(O) visa route: Q&A: The new Hong Kong British National (Overseas) visa and published a report Integration in the UK: Understanding the Data on what we do and do not know about different dimensions of migrant integration in the UK.
  
  
    Welsh Local Government Association
  
  
    Migration Scotland
  






      
        
    Published 8 April 2021
    Last updated 29 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 July 2021
              Updated to reflect issue of guidance on targeted support for ESOL and destitution to local authorities, publication of prospectuses on VCSE funds and general updates on welcome programme.
            
            
              8 April 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Welcome: a guide for Hong Kong British National (Overseas) visa holders in the UK
        Hong Kong British Nationals (Overseas) welcome programme
        Home Office Indicators of Integration framework 2019 third edition
        Third Party Hate Crime Reporting Service Fund
        An introduction to the Hong Kong British National (Overseas) visa

  




      

    Collection

  


        Hong Kong British Nationals (Overseas) welcome programme

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        British citizenship 

  


  

  


    
  


    