The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated many forces already in play over the last decade. One of the most significant shifts being the move to . In this context, a frequent question we hear from leaders is: How do we promote healthy and performance-driving habits across our front-line teams, many of whom are more decentralized than ever before?The good news is that there is .  are automatic behaviors that occur in response to a recurring cue in the environment. Environmental cues are the key, but often an overlooked, component of habit formation. Fortunately, this means major transitions open the door for organizations to help their teams build positive and healthy workplace habits.In his best-selling book , Charles Duhigg breaks down habits into three parts: a cue, a routine and a reward. We’ll use the example of recognizing team members for exceptional work to illustrate each one.In this case, the  is recognizing a team member, for example publicly acknowledging their accomplishment. The  is the prompt that causes the routine to happen. Cues may take many forms including location, time, an emotional state, other people, or an immediately preceding action. Here, the cue may be an immediately-preceding action – a team member doing something exceptional. The  is the craving that is satisfied by the routine. In this example, the reward may be the emotional response. It feels good to make others feel good.Individuals can choose the  they want to start or stop based on the they’re hoping to experience, and use best practices to do so sustainably, such as starting with micro-behaviors.However, when it comes to cues, individuals have less control. Whereas a 2006 meta-analysis by Thomas Webb and Paschal Sheeran found that intentions to change behaviors are only modestly related to actual behavior change, several studies by habit expert, Wendy Wood, and her colleagues estimate that 45% of daily behavior happens in the same place at the same time – or location and time cues.Organizations can help promote healthy employee habits in two ways: defining the routines to start and stop and changing cues in the environment.As we continue into the unknown , we can expect more shifts in context to disrupt employees’ existing work habits. While this may seem daunting to organizations, it creates opportunities to support employees in building new, positive habits in their place.