
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Adult weight management services: collect and record data
  

  
  

  
    
  Documents to support service providers to collect, record and submit adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services data.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Office for Health Improvement and Disparities

      
      Published
      21 June 2017
      Last updated
      
        2 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services commissioned by local authorities: minimum data set technical guidance for submitting organisations
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services: minimum data set reporting spreadsheet
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 121 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Adult weight management services grant data collection: privacy information
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Capturing data: a tool to collect and record adult weight management service data
    
        XLSM, 97.1 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The minimum dataset technical guidance describes the data items required by Office for Health Improvement and Disparities (OHID) as a condition of the adult weight management services grant. The technical guidance document explains the process for completion and submission of the dataset, using the OHID data reporting spreadsheet provided.

The privacy notice explains the data that is being collected including how it will be used and may be shared.

The ‘Capturing data: a tool to collect and record adult weight management service data’ is a more detailed tool that supports the consistent collection and reporting of outcomes in adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services at a local level. It can be used in conjunction with the minimum data set, however, the completion of this tool is not a condition of the adult weight management services grant. This tool was created by Public Health England (now OHID) in 2017.




        
      

      
    Published 21 June 2017
    Last updated 2 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 December 2021
              Replaced 'Adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services: technical guidance on the minimum data set' with 'Adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services commissioned by local authorities: minimum data set technical guidance for submitting organisations' and updated the adult weight management grant number and added links to the Short Warwick-Edinburgh Wellbeing Scale and the National Statistics Postcode Lookup. Updated 'Adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services: minimum data set reporting spreadsheet' to reflect guidance on data validation.
            
            
              29 September 2021
              Updated 'Adult tier 2 behavioural weight management services: technical guidance on the minimum data set'.
            
            
              19 July 2021
              Added definitions to technical guidance. Added data fields to data set reporting spreadsheet, and updated guidance to reflect this.
            
            
              5 July 2021
              Added new guidance, privacy notice and data set reporting spreadsheet.
            
            
              21 June 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Healthy weight coach elearning programme: for primary care networks, healthcare practices and pharmacies
        Weight management interventions: standard evaluation framework
        Weight management services during COVID-19: phase 1 insights
        Child weight management services: systematic review
        Adult weight management: short conversations with patients

  




      

    Collection

  


        Weight management

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Obesity
        Laboratories and reference facilities

  


  

  


    
  


    