
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Community Housing Fund: prospectus
  

  
  

  
    
  Information and guidance for organisations interested in making bids to the Community Housing Fund.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Homes England

      
      Published
      2 July 2018
      Last updated
      
        3 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Community Housing Fund: prospectus
    
        PDF, 361KB, 23 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@homesengland.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Community Housing Fund: prospectus, accessible version
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The government is making available £163 million across England up to 2020 to 2021 through the Community Housing Fund.

The Fund aims to support an increase in housing supply in England by increasing the number of additional homes delivered by the community-led housing sector; to provide housing that is affordable at local income levels and remains so in perpetuity; and to deliver a lasting legacy for the community-led housing sector in the form of an effective and financially self-sustaining body of expertise within the house building industry in England.

This prospectus gives information and guidance for organisations interested in making bids to the Community Housing Fund.



        
      

      
    Published 2 July 2018
    Last updated 3 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 February 2021
              Added accessible version of 'Community Housing Fund: prospectus'
            
            
              23 January 2019
              The CHF prospectus has been updated to the latest version.
            
            
              2 July 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Community Housing Fund

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        House building
        Housing design and sustainability

  


  

  


    
  


    