
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Government Geography Profession - Professional Events
  

  
  
  
      
  Keep up-to-date with regular and ongoing events of the profession and beyond. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Geography Profession

      
      Published
      22 June 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Monthly Webinars

        
        
          Annual Conference

        
        
          Geography in Government Awards

        
        
          Join us

        
        
          Contact us

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Monthly Webinars
The profession hosts a monthly webinar for its members covering interesting topical content and invites speakers to share their experiences from within and outside of public sector. Webinar details can be found via the Geography Profession Slack channel and the monthly newsletter. These are great opportunities to showcase and promote the work we do in government and beyond.

Annual Conference

The profession holds an annual conference, which was attended by over 250 individuals last year. This provides a chance to discuss and listen to key speakers talk about relevant and topical geographical issues within the public sector.

Geography in Government Awards

To celebrate the geographical work across the civil, crown and public sector, the profession hosts the Geography in Government (GiG) Awards. Reflecting the importance of geography and spatial thinking in the design and delivery of public policy, our members are drawn from a diverse range of organisations.

Entry to the awards is free.

The six individual award categories are as follows:


  Advancing geospatial data science
  Contribution to the profession
  Operational delivery
  Impact on policy
  Excellence in geo-visualisation and cartography
  Excellence in Local Government (new category this year)


Shortlisted nominees will be invited to the Geography in Government Awards ceremony, at which the winner of each category will be announced. The winners of each category will be reviewed by an external panel to identify the year’s overall winner, who will be presented an award at the prestigious annual Royal Geographical Society Awards Ceremony (with IBG).

Details of the categories and how to apply.

See winners and shortlisted entries from the 2018 Awards.

Join us

If you are a civil, crown or public servant, and a geographer, find out more about our benefits and how to join us

If you’re not a civil, crown or public servant, but would be interested in a role within one of our organisations and becoming part of the Government Geography Profession, please see our Jobs in Government page for more information.

Contact us

For more information please contact us on GovHeadGeog@defra.gov.uk 




      
        
    Published 22 June 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government

  


  

  


    
  


    