
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Sample accessibility statement
  

  
  

  
    
  Sample accessibility statement for a fictional public sector website or app, including sample wording and guidance on what to include.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      17 May 2019
      Last updated
      
        2 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Sample accessibility statement (for a fictional public sector website)
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Use this sample accessibility statement to help you write a statement for your own public sector website or mobile app. Some of the wording is legally required, so make sure you include that in your statement.

This sample statement is based on the model statement published by the EU, which sets out what information you have to put in an accessibility statement - and our own research into what’s useful to disabled website users.

Publishing an accessibility statement is one of the things public sector organisations must do to meet the requirements of accessibility regulations.



        
      

      
    Published 17 May 2019
    Last updated 2 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 April 2020
              Updated sample statement in line with the EU model statement.
            
            
              12 July 2019
              Updated format for listing accessibility problems to provide greater clarity around achieving consistency with model required by EU.

You now need to break up this section into subsections covering: what about your website doesn't comply with the regulations, what problems you've judged it would be a disproportionate burden to fix, and what issues because they're exempt from the regulations. You also need to explain which of the WCAG 2.1 AA success criteria the problems fail on.
            
            
              20 May 2019
              Added information on what to say if there aren't any accessibility issues with your website or app.
            
            
              17 May 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Understanding accessibility requirements for public sector bodies
        Make your website or app accessible and publish an accessibility statement
        How to publish on GOV.UK
        Reporting an accessibility problem on a public sector website

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Content and publishing

  


  

  


    
  


    