
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Apply for the Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition
  

  
  

  
    
  The Industry of Future Programme (IFP) aims to increase the range of options available to industry to enable them to decarbonise at a faster rate.   

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      2 August 2021
      Last updated
      
        30 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition guidance
    
        PDF, 419KB, 31 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: questions and answers (new questions added 22 September 2021)  
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites invitation to participate
    
        PDF, 367KB, 30 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition registration form
    
        https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/s/BEIS-Industry-of-Future-Scoping-Study-Registration/
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition application form
    
        https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/s/BEIS-IndustryofFuture-ApplicationForm/
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition application form (Word version)
    
        ODT, 214KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition declaration 3: conflict of interest
    
        ODT, 12.9KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition declaration 4: agreement to cooperate
    
        ODT, 12.5KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition declaration 5: code of practice
    
        ODT, 16.1KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industry of Future innovation competition: stakeholder event 13 July 2021
    
        PDF, 743KB, 40 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

Registration deadline extended to 14 October 2021
Application deadline extended to 29 October 2021


The Industry of Future Programme (IFP): Industrial Sites competition aims to increase the range of options available to industry to enable them to decarbonise at a faster rate.

Up to 40 industrial sites can apply for funding to develop industrial decarbonisation roadmaps. Initial funding will be used for scoping studies. The studies will include:


  identification of optimal decarbonisation options
  the permanent installation of technologies, including research and development of technologies
  testing of technology solutions


The Industry of Future Programme competition is part of the £1 billion Net Zero Innovation Portfolio (NZIP).

How to apply

To apply:


  read the guidance document for further information about the competition
  
submit a registration form by noon, 14 October 2021
  
submit an online application form and the 3 declaration documents by noon, 29 October 2021


We have published a Word version of the application form to help you prepare your application. Final applications must be submitted using the online application form.

We are also running a competition to appoint delivery partners for the contract to produce the decarbonisation roadmaps for the selected industrial sites. The call for this competition will be issued to an approved list of suppliers.

Engagement day event, 13 July 2021

We held an engagement day event about the competition on 13 July 2021. We published the slides and questions and answers from this event.




        
      

      
    Published 2 August 2021
    Last updated 30 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 September 2021
              Registration and application deadlines extended to 14 October and 29 October 2021 respectively.
            
            
              22 September 2021
              Registration deadline extended from 23 September to 30 September 2021.
            
            
              7 September 2021
              Applications to the Industry of Future Programme: Industrial Sites competition are now open.
            
            
              2 August 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Apply for the Red Diesel Replacement competition Phase 1
        Floating Offshore Wind (FOW) Demonstration Programme (closed to applications)
        Apply for the Energy Entrepreneurs Fund: phase 8A
        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio
        Biomass Feedstocks Innovation Programme

  




      

    Collection

  


        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy
        Low carbon technologies

  


  

  


    
  


    