
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pathways: Analytical Awareness for Non-Analysts
  

  
  
  
      
  Government Analysis Function Learning Pathways, highlighting a route through learning for non-analysts.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Analysis Function

      
      Published
      1 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Analytical Awareness for Non-Analysts

        
        
          Persona

        
        
          Summary

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Analytical Awareness for Non-Analysts


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Description

Analytical skills are in demand within government, industry and academia, and are listed as a key requirement for many roles in these fields. The analytical awareness pathway will provide you with a basic understanding of issues surrounding modern data analysis, analytical coding practices, quality of analysis and the impact these have on wider data science practice.

Learning Objectives


  Understand the importance of data and analytical approaches for effective decision making.
  Describe how quality of analytical evidence helps develop confidence for supporting recommendations.
  Demonstrate knowledge around basic coding tools used in a generic analytical environment.
  Explain how analytical awareness can help develop data science capability within an organisation.


Length

This pathway contains four courses. Note that some learning in this pathway is hosted on Civil Service Learning and incurs a cost.

Persona

To help decide if this is the pathway for you, personas have been designed to create a realistic representation of the intended learning audience.



General Background

Ash works in a non-technical role within Human Resources (HR) and is using data more frequently to make evidence-based decisions.

Starting Point

Ash manages a large amount of data such as application forms, produces reports and uses Excel frequently.

Perceived Needs

Ash would like to learn more about modern data analysis tools and is eager to find out more about the benefits of coding before signing up for a coding course.

Special Considerations

Ash would prefer some trainer-led courses, especially around coding as this is unfamiliar.

Summary

This pathway will provide you with a basic understanding of issues surrounding modern data analysis, analytical coding practices, quality of analysis and the impact these have on wider data science practice.


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Back to Analytical Learning Pathways page.




      
        
    Published 1 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pathways: Communicating Insight
        Pathways: Text Analysis
        Pathways: Statistical Analysis
        Pathways: Reproducible Analytical Pipelines
        Pathways: Data Quality

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    