
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Breast screening: guidance for breast screening mammographers
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance on the mammographic aspects (both clinical and technical) of breast screening QA and the quality control of radiographic procedures. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      1 April 2006
      Last updated
      
        16 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Guidance for breast screening mammographers
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Breast screening: mammographic image assessment tool
    
        ODS, 10.3KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This clinical guidance was last updated in December 2017. Any changes since then have been minor.

The guidance encourages best practice by mammographic staff to achieve NHS Breast Screening Programme (BSP) objectives and standards. It gives clear and detailed information on radiographic aspects of breast screening quality assurance and:


  provides a framework for audit and for identifying, reporting and resolving problems
  supports continuous improvement in quality for all radiographic aspects of breast screening service delivery
  promotes the development of a learning culture within breast screening
  promotes best practice, effective training and continuing professional development


The guidance has been produced by a working group of the NHS BSP clinical and professional group for radiography. They update and replace ‘Quality Assurance Guidelines for Mammography Including Radiographic Quality Control’ (Publication 63, 2006).

This refresh includes:


  the removal of quality control guidance which is published in a separate publication
  details of new quality assurance processes
  the removal of reference to core radiographic standards (these are published online)
  the requirement for Eklund technique for women with breast implants
  updated information on workforce education and training





        
      

      
    Published 1 April 2006
    Last updated 16 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 September 2020
              Replaced guidance PDF with HTML version.
            
            
              11 December 2017
              Updated version of guidance.
            
            
              1 April 2006
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Cervical screening: standards report 2018 to 2019
        Newborn hearing screening: standards data report April 2017 to March 2018
        Breast screening: interval cancers
        Newborn and infant physical screening: quality improvement
        Antenatal screening standards: data report 2019 to 2020

  




      

    Collection

  


        Breast screening: professional guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        NHS breast screening (BSP) programme 

  


  

  


    
  


    