
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    How to complete the authority proforma tool (APT)
  

  
  

  
    
  Information to help local authorities complete and submit their APT for 2021 to 2022.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Education and Skills Funding Agency

      
      Published
      15 December 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Authority proforma tool: purpose and process
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    How to complete the authority proforma tool
    
        PDF, 636KB, 94 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email ESFA.GOVUK-ENQUIRIES@education.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Schools block dataset technical specification: 2021 to 2022
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The APT is designed to support local authorities in modelling different options for their funding formulae. It is also the means by which local authorities submit details of their schools funding formulae to ESFA, in accordance with arrangements set out by the Secretary of State for Education. The information submitted in the APT also allows ESFA to calculate academy budgets and recoupment deductions to dedicated schools grant allocations.

Authority proforma tool: purpose and process

Use the purpose and process guidance to understand the content and structure of the APT.

How to complete the authority proforma tool

Follow this step-by-step guide on how to complete the APT.

Schools block dataset technical specification: 2021 to 2022

Read the technical specification for detailed information about the schools block dataset contained in your APT.


Accessing the APT

We have sent emails to each local authority providing details of how to access their APT. If your local authority has not received this email, please contact us by emailing: aptsubmissions.questions@education.gov.uk.




        
      

      
    Published 15 December 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pupil premium: allocations and conditions of grant 2019 to 2020
        Service pupil premium (SPP): information for schools
        Pension grants for schools, local authorities and music hubs
        Academies payments information: remittance advice notes
        Universal infant free school meals (UIFSM): 2019 to 2020

  




      

    Collection

  


        Local authorities: pre-16 schools funding

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Local authority schools funding

  


  

  


    
  


    