
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Lighting guidance note for the Energy Technology List (ETL)
  

  
  

  
    
  A guide to the types of lighting eligible for the ETL. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      6 November 2015
      Last updated
      
        1 April 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    ETL guidance note 10: Lighting
    
        PDF, 251KB, 5 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This document provides a summary of the categories of lighting  that are covered by the ETL eligibility criteria.



        
      

      
    Published 6 November 2015
    Last updated 1 April 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 April 2020
              On 29 October 2018, the Chancellor announced that the ECA and First Year Tax Credits Scheme (FYTC) will end from April 2020 for products on the ETL. This ETL publication has been updated to remove references to the ECA.
            
            
              6 July 2018
              Updated to incorporate the recent changes to the ETL criteria.
            
            
              6 November 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        ETL product types: radiant heating equipment
        ETL product types: hot water, biomass and steam boilers
        Energy Technology List (ETL) new technology proposal form
        Product application for inclusion on the Energy Technology List (ETL)
        Energy Technology List (ETL) product testing framework

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Climate change and energy

  


  

  


    
  


    