
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Importing and exporting organic food
  

  
  
  
      
  Rules for trading organic food.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      31 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        1 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Importing organic food from the EU, Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland to Great Britain

        
        
          Moving organic food from Northern Ireland to Great Britain

        
        
          Importing organic food from non-EU countries to Great Britain

        
        
          Exporting organic food from Great Britain to the EU

        
        
          Moving organic food from Great Britain to Northern Ireland

        
        
          Exporting organic food from the UK to non-EU countries

        
        
          Importing or exporting organic food between Northern Ireland and the EU

        
        
          Importing or exporting organic food between Northern Ireland and non-EU countries

        
        
          Returned goods

        
        
          If you need help

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Great Britain (England, Scotland and Wales) recognises the EU, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein as equivalent for the purpose of trade in organics until 31 December 2023.

Food and feed certified as organic in the EU, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein will continue to be accepted as organic in Great Britain until 31 December 2023.

The EU has recognised the UK for the purpose of exporting organic products to the EU until 31 December 2023.

Food and feed certified as organic in Great Britain will continue to be accepted as organic in the EU until 31 December 2023.

Importing organic food from the EU, Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland to Great Britain

Organic products imported from the EU, Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland to Great Britain will not require a certificate of inspection (COI) until 1 July 2022.

From 1 July 2022, organic products imported from the EU, Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland to Great Britain will require a COI. You’ll use the interim manual GB organic import system.

To request the forms for the manual GB organic import system, contact your organic control body.

Moving organic food from Northern Ireland to Great Britain

There is no change to the movement of organic goods from Northern Ireland to Great Britain.

You do not need a COI if you’re moving goods from Northern Ireland to Great Britain.

Importing organic food from non-EU countries to Great Britain

All organic goods imported from non-EU countries must have a valid GB COI.

You’ll need to use an interim manual GB organic import system to import organic food and feed into Great Britain.

To request the forms for the manual UK organic import system, contact your organic control body.

Certifying organic food in countries outside the UK for export to Great Britain

Control bodies and control authorities can apply for recognition in countries outside the UK for export to Great Britain.

Applying for recognition means that a control body or control authority:


  is recognised as certifying organic food to equivalent Great Britain organic standards in countries outside the UK
  can export to Great Britain without requiring additional certification for the products and countries recognised


See the list of control bodies and control authorities that are recognised in Great Britain as certifying organic food to equivalent EU organic standards.

These control bodies and control authorities must reapply for recognition to certify to an equivalent Great Britain organic standard by the end of 2022.

To apply (or reapply) for recognition, you should email UK_TC_CB_comms@defra.gov.uk and provide the following details of the control body or control authority’s:


  full name
  full official postal address
  contact details for 2 people (which will be the only contacts used throughout the application process)
  website address


Defra will email you a secure link to a folder and application form.

You’ll need to:


  Access the application form – this form will tell you which documents you’ll need to complete.
  Complete and submit the documents via a SharePoint Online site.


Defra will continue to work directly with you until your application has been accepted or declined.

Exporting organic food from Great Britain to the EU

All organic goods exported to the EU must have a valid COI using the EU’s Trade Control and Expert System New Technology (TRACES NT).

Contact your control body to:


  approve your business on TRACES NT for exports
  stay up to date


Moving organic food from Great Britain to Northern Ireland

Under the terms of the Northern Ireland Protocol, EU Organic Regulations apply in Northern Ireland.

The movement of organic goods from Great Britain to Northern Ireland must be accompanied by a valid COI using the EU’s TRACES NT. You do not need to pay for a COI as these costs are covered by the Movement Assistance Scheme.

There’s an arrangement in place which allows traders such as supermarkets and their suppliers to move some goods without the need for official certification.

For those traders who are now authorised, the NI Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) have issued guidance on the requirements for goods movements.

Read DAERA’s guidance on organic food and feed in Northern Ireland.

Contact your control body to:


  approve your business on TRACES NT for exports
  stay up to date


Exporting organic food from the UK to non-EU countries

Some non-EU countries may require an export certificate for each consignment. You should check with the country you’re exporting to.

Some food and feed that’s certified as organic in Great Britain is also recognised as organic in the following countries:


  Australia
  Canada
  Chile
  Israel
  Japan
  New Zealand
  Republic of Korea
  Switzerland
  Tunisia
  United States of America


Check with your control body:


  what product categories you can export from these countries
  the rules for exporting your products


Importing or exporting organic food between Northern Ireland and the EU

There are no changes to imports or exports of organic food between Northern Ireland and the EU. Trade in organics should continue as before.

Read DAERA’s guidance on organic food and feed in Northern Ireland.

Importing or exporting organic food between Northern Ireland and non-EU countries

You must use TRACES NT and have an EU COI to import organic food from a non-EU country to Northern Ireland.

Read DAERA’s guidance on importing and exporting organic food between Northern Ireland and non-EU countries.

Returned goods

If the goods you have exported from Great Britain to the EU are rejected by the EU due to incorrect paperwork or failure to meet their organic goods standards, the Border Control Post (BCP) will:


  notify you or your agent
  ask you to confirm if the goods should be destroyed or returned to Great Britain


You’ll need to notify a Port Health Authority (PHA) or your Local Authority (LA) before your goods arrive back in Great Britain.

You’ll also need to ask the PHA or LA to check the exporting documents including:


  the original EU COI

  export or transport documents and any commodity specific requirements
  a declaration from the EU BCP describing the reason for refusal of entry


Selling or marketing returned goods in Great Britain

If you want to sell or market your goods as ‘organic’ in Great Britain, you’ll need to complete a returned organic goods application form.

The PHA or LA will need to check your application against the original export documents to ensure that the goods listed on the application match those that were originally exported. The PHA and LA will also check that there’s no reason for these goods not to be sold or marketed in Great Britain as organic.

If you need help

Contact your organic control body if you have any queries.





      
        
    Published 31 December 2020
    Last updated 1 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 November 2021
              New guidance on: 

* certifying organic food in countries outside the UK for export to Great Britain
* moving organic food from Great Britain to Northern Ireland
            
            
              14 September 2021
              Updated with a new date for the introduction of controls on imports of organic food.
            
            
              7 September 2021
              Removed the 1 October 2021 date from the 'Moving organic food from Great Britain to Northern Ireland' guidance. Authorised traders can continue to move some goods from Great Britain to Northern Ireland without needing official certification.
            
            
              24 March 2021
              The date from which imports will need a certificate of inspection has changed from 1 July 2021 to 1 January 2022.
            
            
              3 March 2021
              Updated section on moving organic food from GB to NI.
            
            
              2 March 2021
              Updated 'Moving organic food from GB to NI' section with information on costs covered by the Movement Assistance Scheme.
            
            
              15 February 2021
              New guidance for bringing goods back to Great Britain if they have been rejected for import.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Organic food: UK approved control bodies
        Organic registers: lists of third countries or territories, control bodies and control authorities
        Organic food: labelling rules
        Returned organic goods application

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Organic farming: how to get certification and apply for funding
        Organic food: labelling rules
        Organic food: UK approved control bodies
        Organic produce tests and inspections

  




      

    Collection

  


        Moving goods into, out of, or through Northern Ireland

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Import, export and customs for businesses

  


  

  


    
  


    