
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care settings
  

  
  

  
    
  Outlines the COVID-19 testing available for testing staff, residents and visitors for all adult social care settings.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Health Security Agency

      
      Published
      24 March 2021
      Last updated
      
        1 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    COVID-19 testing available for adult social care in England: a summary
    
        PDF, 508KB, 11 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    On-site testing for adult social care services: rapid lateral flow test guide
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    On-site testing for adult social care services: rapid lateral flow test guide
    
        PDF, 1.13MB, 19 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Self-test for adult social care services: detailed rapid lateral flow test guide 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Self-test for adult social care services: detailed rapid lateral flow test guide 
    
        PDF, 1.6MB, 22 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Self-test for ASC services: summary rapid LFT guide
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Self-test for ASC services: summary rapid LFT guide
    
        PDF, 184KB, 2 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Visitors to adult social care settings: reporting rapid lateral flow tests at home
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Visitors to adult social care settings: reporting rapid lateral flow tests at home (to print)
    
        PDF, 170KB, 2 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    How to use your rapid lateral flow test
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    How to use your rapid lateral flow test
    
        PDF, 322KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    COVID-19 testing: terms and conditions
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    COVID-19 self-test for staff, service users and visitors in adult social care settings: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Testing for COVID-19 in adult social care (ASC) is crucial to help protect those who receive care and adult social care staff. Testing programmes identify people who may unknowingly have the virus, enabling those who test positive and their contacts to self-isolate and break the chain of transmission.

Testing is an important part of the approach to help protect those in adult social care services, alongside infection control measures and proper use of personal protective equipment (PPE). Vaccination offers vital protection, but no vaccine is 100% effective, and importantly we do not yet know if being vaccinated prevents transmission of the disease. Therefore, testing and other infection control measures must continue to be used together to help keep care home residents, those who receive care and staff safe.

We are continuously reviewing our testing strategy for adult social care in light of the latest evidence and available testing.

Please see the following testing guidance for a range of specific adult social care settings:


  
    testing for adult care homes
  
  
    testing for extra care and supported living settings
  
  
    testing for homecare staff
  
  
    testing for personal assistants
  
  
    testing for day care centres
  


Alternative formats

The COVID-19 self-test instructions are also available as an easy read and in other languages.

Watch a video on how to self-test using a lateral flow test kit


Anyone in the UK with COVID-19 symptoms can get a test.





        
      

      
    Published 24 March 2021
    Last updated 1 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 November 2021
              Added How to use your rapid lateral flow test (PDF and HTML versions).
            
            
              13 October 2021
              Updated to reflect policy has now changed regarding self-isolation for fully vaccinated individuals following contact with a COVID-19 positive case. References to lockdown also removed to reflect the easing of national COVID-19 restrictions.
            
            
              24 September 2021
              Updated to reflect changes to policy when there is one case of COVID-19 in a care home, rapid lateral flow testing frequency, changes to policy when there are 2 or more cases of COVID-19 in a care home and changes to ending outbreak restrictions, when they can lifted and ongoing testing after this period.
            
            
              9 July 2021
              Updated PDF for 'Self-test for ASC services: summary rapid LFT guide'.
            
            
              5 July 2021
              Updated 'COVID-19 testing available for adult social care in England: a summary' to reflect that policy for responding to the Delta variant (first identified in India) in care homes has now changed. As has been the case for the Alpha variant (first identified in Kent) cases since May 2021, for outbreaks involving the Delta variant, end of outbreak testing can now be undertaken 14 days (previously 28) after the most recent positive case. All positive cases should be treated as the Delta variant, unless proven otherwise.
            
            
              29 June 2021
              Updated 'On-site testing for adult social care services: rapid lateral flow test guide' and 'Self-test for ASC services: summary rapid LFT guide' to clarify how to report missing or damaged components in test kits and how to read results; and to reflect Scotland moving to 119. 'Self-test for adult social care services: detailed rapid lateral flow test guide' also updated to reflect Scotland moving to 119. Updated 'Self-test for ASC services: summary rapid LFT guide' to reflect IHP registration page update.
            
            
              20 May 2021
              NHS helpline number for Scotland changed to 119.
            
            
              17 May 2021
              Updated 'COVID-19 testing available for adult social care in England: a summary' to reflect a reduction in the time required to determine the end of an outbreak in care homes, that extra care and supported living testing now includes visitors, the testing regime for day care centres has changed, personal assistants testing regime has been removed and universal testing is now offered. Renamed 'Step-by-step guide for ASC staff to self-test using rapid lateral flow tests' to 'Self-test for adult social care services: detailed rapid lateral flow test guide' and 'Rapid lateral flow testing in ASC settings: an overview' to 'Self-test for ASC services: summary rapid LFT guide'.
            
            
              28 April 2021
              Updated to add 'Visitors to adult social care settings: reporting rapid lateral flow tests at home' guidance.
            
            
              22 April 2021
              Added 'On-site testing for adult social care services: rapid lateral flow test guide', 'Step-by-step guide for ASC staff to self-test using rapid lateral flow tests' and 'Rapid lateral flow testing in ASC settings: an overview' guidance; added 'Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing: terms and conditions' and 'Coronavirus (COVID-19) self-test for staff, service users and visitors in adult social care settings: privacy notice'; and added links to self-test instructions in alternative formats.
            
            
              24 March 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Visiting arrangements in care homes
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing in adult care homes
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing service for extra care and supported living settings
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for homecare workers
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for homecare workers: information for agencies

  




      

    Collection

  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): adult social care guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Testing for coronavirus (COVID-19)

  


  

  


    
  


    