The U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE)  supports research and development (R&D) in cutting-edge manufacturing technology that improves the energy efficiency, material productivity, and competitiveness of the American manufacturing sector.These new technologies are not just improving plants and processes—they are shaping modern manufacturing careers. AMO’s education and workforce development initiatives span the office’s entire portfolio, promote regional economic development, and address the needs of community college students, graduate students, and workers currently employed in manufacturing. Examples include: is an annual opportunity to inspire the next generation to pursue careers in modern manufacturing. As part of this celebration, participants in AMO’s traineeships and internships reflect on their experiences in workforce development programs and the future of manufacturing:“In high school, I was deciding between a career in art or a career in engineering. I had many family members and friends tell me that I was too creative, artistic, and talkative to enjoy a career in engineering, especially one in manufacturing. As you can guess, I chose a career in engineering, and I can happily say that my friends and family who thought manufacturing was not going to satisfy my creative and social itch were mistaken.Manufacturing is full of opportunities for abstract thought, ideation, and communication. If you have an artistic talent and passion for connecting with people, your unique ideas can help to solve problems that manufacturing is currently facing. Being artistic and outgoing is a strength in engineering – also it is important to embrace the diversity you bring to any field!”  “[The Rapid Advancement of Process Innovation Deployment (RAPID) internship program] taught me leadership, teamwork, and above all, how to rethink chemical processes and communicate them effectively. As an aspiring business, engineering, and project leader, [this experience] adds skill sets and impacts my career by helping me to stand out as a critical thinker. Industry thrives on creativity and innovation, and I see myself making not just a direct impact but making an impact quickly within the professional space.”"The best part of the IAC program is that it provides students with practical experience in energy assessments, consulting, and project management. Students are given the ability to lead while professional engineers are there to help them out [as mentors].As a lead student at the University of Illinois at Chicago center, the IAC program encourages the development of my leadership and management skills while offering valuable technical knowledge and experience. I have the highest appreciation for the IAC experience because it has shaped the career that I enjoy today.”“As a future nanoscientist interested in neuroscience applications such as artificial sensory devices and artificial limb replacements I will undoubtedly spend a significant part of my career interacting with carbon fiber composites. This IACMI internship allows me to get a head start on testing and improving current composites so that I can understand how to design them for future, more niche applications.”It’s been really exciting to see rapid manufacturing and prototyping become more accessible to people. Ten years ago, it would have been crazy to think that I could have a 3D printer sitting on my desk at home, but engineering has gotten us to that point!In case you missed it, AMO  the EPICS program’s efforts to develop and manufacture personal protective equipment for the Atlanta-area healthcare community in response to COVID-19.For more insights from the advanced-manufacturing community, follow the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy on , , and .To continue celebrating Manufacturing Day, read .