
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Cervical screening: education and training
  

  
  
  
      
  Training and continuing professional development (CPD) for people working in the NHS cervical screening programme (CSP) in England.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      8 December 2017
      Last updated
      
        13 May 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          E-learning

        
        
          Physicians: video learning modules

        
        
          Cervical sample taker training

        
        
          Cervical cytology training

        
        
          Education and training: all programmes

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guide sets out education and training resources available to healthcare professionals working in the NHS cervical screening programme (CSP).

E-learning

E-learning developed by the NHS screening programmes is available on the e-Learning for Healthcare (e-LfH) website.


Read about CSP e-learning and sign up for e-Learning for Healthcare.


E-learning for GPs


Expected Autumn 2018

The British Medical Journal’s screening for cervical cancer module, covering:


  how to advise women worried about cervical cancer
  what information to give women
  how to advise women who have questions about the NHS cervical screening programme



Physicians: video learning modules

Watch 4 medical animations for health professionals showing cervical anatomy and the development of cervical cancer.

Cervical sample taker training


Read the guidance for the training of new cervical sample takers.

Download presentations for each of the training modules within the publication.


Cervical cytology training

There are 4 NHS CSP approved cervical cytology training centres. 3 in England and 1 in Scotland.

North of England Pathology and Screening Education Centre.



Unit 3, Wakefield Office Village
Fryers Way
Silkwood Park
Wakefield
WF5 9TJ

Ground Floor, Clinical Sciences Building 2
Manchester Royal Infirmary
Oxford Road
Manchester
M13 9WL



London Regional Cytology Training Centre.



Level 6X, Room 005
St Marks Building
The North West London Hospitals NHS Trust
Northwick Park Hospital
Watford Road
Harrow
Middlesex
HA1 3UJ



South West Regional Cytology Training Centre in Bristol.



Department of Cellular Pathology
Pathology Sciences Building
Southmead Hospital
Bristol
BS10 5NB



Scottish Cytology Training School.



1st Floor, Building 9
Edinburgh Bioquarter
9 Little France Road
Old Dalkeith Road
Edinburgh
EH16 4XU



Education and training: all programmes


Read and download education and training resources for all screening programmes.


This includes:


  the screening timeline
  events


Health Knowledge: screening overview

The interactive learning on screening available from Health Knowledge is helpful for new and non clinical staff or those returning after a long period absent.





      
        
    Published 8 December 2017
    Last updated 13 May 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 May 2021
              Removed the Birmingham Cytology Training Centre, which no longer provides courses in gynaecological cytology.
            
            
              8 December 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Breast screening: education and training
        Newborn and infant physical examination screening: education and training
        Cervical screening: cervical sample taker training
        Newborn blood spot screening: education and training
        Fetal anomaly screening: education and training

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        NHS cervical screening (CSP) programme 

  


  

  


    
  


    