
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Aylesbury Young Offender Institution
  

  
  
  
      
  Aylesbury is a Young Offender institution (YOI) in Buckinghamshire for young men aged 17 to 21 serving long-term sentences.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      21 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        27 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Aylesbury

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Aylesbury

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Aylesbury

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Aylesbury

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minute survey.


Book and plan your visit to Aylesbury

Aylesbury is now offering visits for immediate family, in line with stage 1 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


To visit someone in Aylesbury you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit up to 28 days in advance (you must give at least 2 working days’ notice)
  have the required ID with you when you go


Contact Aylesbury if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit

If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Aylesbury
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits

Aylesbury is running a limited visits schedule. Visits are also happening differently than normal, observing strict guidelines, which must be followed.

You can book your visit by telephone. There is no online booking service available.

Booking line: 01296 444302
Monday to Friday, 9:30am to 1:30pm excluding Bank Holidays
Find out about call charges

Visiting times:


  Monday: 2pm to 4:15pm
  Tuesday: 2pm to 4:15pm
  Thursday: 2pm to 4:15pm
  Saturday: 2pm to 4:15pm
  Sunday: 2pm to 4:15pm


Books on Visits

Books can be handed in by visitors. This must be arranged at the time of booking the visit; limited to three books per visit.

How to book legal and professional visits
We are accepting legal visit bookings. These must be made at least 24 hours in advance.

Booking line: 01296 444312
Monday to Friday, 9am to 1:30pm
Alternative booking lines: 01296 444207 or 01296 444097
Monday to Friday, 9am to 3:30pm
Find out about call charges

Visiting times are Wednesday, 9am to 11am and 2pm to 4pm.

If you need to bring in a laptop, tell the prison 48 hours in advance.

Getting to Aylesbury

Find Aylesbury on a map

The closest railway station is Aylesbury. From there it is a 20 minute walk to Aylesbury YOI. You can also take a bus or taxi.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



A visitors car park is available. There are disabled spaces available on a first come first served basis.

Entering Aylesbury

All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison. Read the list of acceptable forms of ID for all visitors.

Visitors, including children, will walk through a metal detector. You will also be sniffed by security dogs.

Aylesbury has a strict dress code policy, which means visitors should wear smart clothes. You cannot wear large coats, gloves or scarves, hooded tops, revealing clothing such as low-cut tops, shorts, or short dresses, offensive slogans, sports team clothing, ripped clothing, watches, or headwear, other than that worn for religious reasons. In addition, you cannot wear flip-flop style shoes (all shoes should have at least an ankle strap).

There are strict controls on what you can take into Aylesbury. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker (£1 coin refundable) or with security. Pushchairs and car seats must be left in the visitors centre.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities

There is a visitors centre run by the Prison Advice and Care Trust (PACT).

You can contact the visitors centre on 01296 444 329 from 12:30pm on visiting days. The visitors centre is open from 1pm on visiting days.

We are now offering visitors the chance to take a Lateral Flow Device Test to allow physical contact in the form of hugging and embracing at the start and end of your visit and hand holding; this is done when you register in the Visits Centre.

Refreshments are now available to order from PACT in the Visits Centre, but only for visitors taking a LFD Test. This will be delivered to your table in the Visits Hall; payment by cash or card.

Family days

Family days are currently not available.

Keep in touch with someone at Aylesbury

There are several ways you can keep in touch with someone during their time at Aylesbury.

Phone calls

Prisoners have phones in their rooms to make outgoing calls so they will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Email

You can send emails to someone in Aylesbury using the Email a Prisoner service.

You can request a reply and attach photos for a small additional fee.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how secure video calls work

Letters

You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number (or date of birth) on the envelope. You must also write your own name and address on the back of the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Aylesbury.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts

You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels

Friends and families of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.
 
For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Clothes for attending court can be sent in without applying in advance. They must be clearly marked as ‘court clothes’ and not contain any other items.

Prisoners on ‘enhanced privileges’ can apply to have two clothing parcels sent to them each year.

Prisoners can buy items from approved suppliers through a catalogue system.

Life at Aylesbury

Aylesbury is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men can learn new skills to help them on release.

Security and safeguarding

Every person at Aylesbury has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by Buckinghamshire Safeguarding Adults Board.

Arrival and first night

When someone first arrives at Aylesbury, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling, ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs, and answer any initial questions they might have.

Induction

Each person who arrives at Aylesbury gets an induction that lasts about a week. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Everyone is given an induction booklet to keep for their own reference.

Accommodation

Up to 410 young men can live at Aylesbury. All rooms are for one person and have a toilet, sink and a phone.

Education and work

Prisoners at Aylesbury are encouraged to take part in meaningful activity and gain qualifications in the following areas:


  business
  ICT
  maths
  English
  barbering
  mentoring
  education and training
  hospitality, food and drink, barista
  horticulture
  music technology
  painting and decorating
  customer service
  fitness and nutrition
  first aid


There are also opportunities to get involved in activities, development and learning outside of a formal setting, such as:


  art and creative writing with Kosetler Trust

  physical education, including the Duke of Edinburgh Awards

  reading with Shannon Trust and The National Literacy Trust

  money management, positive parenting
  work skills
  BACO
  information, advice and guidance through Forward Trust



Aylesbury also runs industrial workshops which are designed to give prisoners transferable life skills to help them when they leave. These include:


  laundry
  bicycle repair
  sign making
  kitchen
  gardens
  waste management
  industrial cleaning
  offending behaviour courses


Aylesbury has a gym with a full range of cardio and weights room equipment. Football, circuits and weights clubs are run throughout the week and there is a parkrun every Saturday morning.

Support for family and friends

Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Support at Aylesbury

The Prison Advice and Care Trust offers support and advice to visitors. They can provide information on finance, jobs, health, drugs and alcohol, accommodation and family support workers.

Problems and complaints

If you have a problem contact Aylesbury. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Aylesbury in response to independent inspections.

Contact Aylesbury

Governor: Mark Allen

Deputy Governor: Andy Routley

Telephone: 01296 444 000
Monday to Friday: 7am to 8pm
Saturday and Sunday: 7am to 5pm
Find out about call charges

Follow us on Twitter @HMPAylesbury

Address


HM/YOI Aylesbury 
Bierton Road
Aylesbury
Bucks
HP20 1EH



See map

Safer custody hotline

If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a man in Aylesbury, call the safer custody hotline.

Telephone: 01296 444 081
Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm 
Find out about call charges

On weekends, call the main switchboard.


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minute survey.





      
        
    Published 21 April 2020
    Last updated 27 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              27 July 2021
              Added link to information about testing for physical contact at visits.
            
            
              20 July 2021
              Clarification on the rules for sending in books, under the 'Gifts and parcels' section
            
            
              20 May 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              6 May 2021
              Prison moved into National Stage 3 framework and is now preparing to open visits for family, friends and significant others. We will update this page with specific visiting information as soon as possible.
            
            
              6 January 2021
              Covid update
            
            
              21 December 2020
              Updated visit info
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              6 November 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new national restrictions in England.
            
            
              2 September 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              11 August 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              27 July 2020
              added twitter handle
            
            
              6 July 2020
              Corrected mistake
            
            
              6 July 2020
              Updated governor info
            
            
              9 June 2020
              updated governor name
            
            
              5 June 2020
              Minor updates
            
            
              21 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Portland Prison and Young Offender Institution
        Standford Hill Prison
        Sudbury Prison
        Thorn Cross Prison
        Brinsford Prison

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    