
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Export controls applying to academic research
  

  
  
  
      
  How the UK's strategic export controls apply to academics, university researchers and their institutions, and when an export licence is needed.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      31 March 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Assess if you need an export licence

        
        
          High risk research

        
        
          Technology and software

        
        
          Collaborating internationally

        
        
          When UK strategic export controls apply

        
        
          Exemptions for the academic community

        
        
          Apply for an export licence

        
        
          Transnational education (TNE)

        
        
          How nationality affects export controls

        
        
          Case studies

        
        
          Penalties and fines

        
        
          Contact ECJU


        
        
          Subscribe to notices to exporters

        
        
          Training and seminars

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

This guidance is for academics or those doing postgraduate research in fields where there is a high risk it could be used for military purposes. This includes the development, production, use or delivery of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

It explains:


  how to assess if the UK’s export controls apply
  when your research might be exempt
  how to check whether you need an export licence



UK strategic export controls focus on high risk activities, such as applied research and could affect your activities if you:


  work with colleagues overseas on research projects
  take your research overseas
  export your technology



It is a criminal offence to export controlled items without the correct licence. Penalties vary depending on the nature of the offence.


Assess if you need an export licence

Unless your work qualifies for an exemption you might need an export licence if one of the following apply:


  your software or technology is linked to items in the consolidated list of strategic military and dual-use items that require export authorisation

  you have been informed, are aware, or suspect that the recipient of the software or technology intends to use it for WMD purposes


and you answer yes to any of the following:


  the software or technology is not in the public domain

  the technology does not meet the definition of basic scientific research

  your research is in one of the disciplines that could be targeted by would-be proliferators

  recipient intends to use or send the information outside the EU
  preliminary online searches or other open source checks show the recipient is potentially involved in suspicious activity


High risk research

Applied research in certain fields is high risk and could potentially be misused for military purposes. These areas are usually in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) subjects.

They include:


  aeronautical and space technology
  applied chemistry, biochemistry and chemical engineering
  applied physics
  biotechnology
  electrical and mechanical engineering
  instrumentation and sensors
  materials technology
  nuclear technologies
  production and process technology
  telecommunications and information technology


Technology and software

Academic and university researchers must check:


  definitions of the term ‘technology’ and ‘software’ as used in export controls
  what constitutes an export of technology


See guidance on exporting military or dual-use technology: definitions.

Working in the cloud

Computer-based services and activities that take place online, in the cloud or through distributed computing, include:


  virtual learning environments (VLEs)
  e-Research
  e-Science


Export controls can still apply to these types of activities and need to be considered.

Collaborating internationally

Before agreeing to any international research collaboration, researchers and institutions must first undertake a due diligence process.

The development and production of complex military systems, such as WMD and the means of their delivery, require expertise in a wide range of technical areas.

A particular collaboration may not on first appearance be directly relevant to such activities. However, a transfer of technical information or data for one purpose could unwittingly be used for another purpose, including assisting in the development or production of WMD.

This is particularly important with organisations in countries subject to sanctions relating to WMD, or countries that have WMD or ballistic missile programmes.

You should note certain countries have an active state policy concerning the diversion of advanced and emerging technologies. This is to support the development of their military including in WMD.

You should:


  Check if there will be any transfer of controlled items, including ‘technology’.
  Check if there is a risk that the activities of a party to the collaboration could divert items, including non-controlled items, to a WMD programme.
  Get an export licence for any transfers.


Assessing risk of collaboration

You must check whether your potential collaboration partner individuals and their organisation have been involved in activities of potential concern using:


  Internet searches to see what is in the public domain
  the list of entities subject to government-imposed sanctions or restrictions

  news articles and press releases about involvement in military or defence projects
  online resources run by non-government organisations, such as King’s College’s Centre for Science and Security Studies and academic think tanks
  Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU) for help with specific enquires if more information and advice is required


Compliance with export control regime in partner’s country

The government of the country where collaborating parties are based will very likely have their own export control restrictions. You need to ensure compliance with their regulations.

When UK strategic export controls apply

Export controls apply:


  to goods, software and technology appearing on control lists
  when there are concerns about end-use or end-user
  when destinations are subject to sanction or other restrictions



Check guidance on UK’s strategic export controls.


Exemptions for the academic community

There are exemptions for some areas of academic research. The government aims to prevent the potential misuse of research or collaboration. It is not to restrict research, academic collaboration, or vet publication of scientific papers.

Exemptions to export controls fall into 3 areas.

In the public domain

This is technology or software available without restrictions on its further dissemination. It excludes the normal copyright restrictions that may apply.

It is unlikely that undergraduate level courses need to consider export controls. Most of the information and technical data used in teaching such degrees is in the public domain. Therefore the exemption would generally apply.

In the case of individual projects it is unlikely that export controls apply. This is because the work generated would generally not meet the full definition of sensitive technology. The same is generally true of most types of taught master’s degrees.

Basic scientific research

Export controls do not apply to research in the pursuit of basic scientific knowledge.

This is  experimental or theoretical work. It is undertaken to solely obtain new knowledge of the fundamental principles of phenomena or observable facts. It is not directed towards a specific practical aim or goal.

This exemption only applies to controlled dual-use technologies. It does not apply where there are end-use, end-user or destination concerns. By definition military listed technology is for a specific application, and therefore is not basic scientific research.

Further protection of academic freedom is set out in section 8 of the Export Control Act 2002.

Patent applications

In the case of non-nuclear dual-use ‘technology’, the controls do not apply to the minimum technical information required to support a patent application.

Limits of academic exemption

Any academic exemption is unlikely to apply to all aspects of research focused advanced postgraduate degrees such as MPhil or PhD looking at areas of controlled technology. Especially as such research programmes will typically be applied research. By their very nature, they will include technology not covered by the ‘public domain’.

Research may be able to use the ‘basic scientific research’ exemption. The use of this exemption is limited by the definition of what is intended by ‘basic scientific research’.

To qualify for this exemption any technology generated by the research for basic scientific research purposes must:


  be solely to add to the sum of human knowledge
  not be aimed at a specific (short-term) practical aim
  not address a specific technical problem


A possible way of determining whether a piece of research is ‘basic scientific research’ is to consider the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of the research being undertaken. A low TRL around 1 to 3, is more likely to fall within the area of ‘basic scientific research’.

If the sole intended output of a piece of work is a published article in a peer reviewed scientific journal, then this is a further useful indicator to this being ‘basic scientific research’ especially as the intended output is to be in the ‘public domain’.

Apply for an export licence


Apply for a licence using SPIRE, the online export licensing system.


Read guidance on applying for an export licence using SPIRE.

Transnational education (TNE)

Both export control restrictions and exemptions apply when a UK institution offers STEM-based courses:


  through an overseas campus
  to overseas-based students by electronic means


When providing these STEM-based courses you must ensure any training, advanced study, continued professional development, or individual research projects:


  comply with export controls
  are not undertaken in support of a WMD programme


Care must also be taken if research is:


  undertaken as part of an applied or work based programme, such as an engineering doctorate
  through a split-site programme of study involving a non-UK based component


How nationality affects export controls

The nationality of any intended recipient is not a factor as to whether or not export controls apply. Therefore the UK does not have what is termed ‘deemed exports’. The transfer of controlled ‘technology’ to a non-UK national, that takes place solely in the UK, and does not involve any transfer from the UK, is not deemed to be an export.

The nationality of a person is a factor with other government approvals, such as the Academic Technology Approval Scheme (ATAS) certificate. This is a requirement for certain non-UK persons to be able to study specific subjects in the UK.

Case studies

Read our case studies showing scenarios when export controls apply to academic research.

Penalties and fines

Breaching export controls is a criminal offence. Penalties can vary depending on the nature of the offence.

They include:


  revocation of licences
  seizure of items
  issuing of a compound penalty fine
  imprisonment for up to 10 years


See how to voluntarily report any licensing irregularities to HMRC.

Contact ECJU



    Helpline

    
      Export Control Joint UnitDepartment for International Trade
Old Admiralty Building
Admiralty PlaceLondonSW1A 2DY
    

    
        
          Email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 020 7215 4594
        
    

    Contact for general queries about strategic export licensing.



Subscribe to notices to exporters

Sign up to our notices to exporters email alert service to keep up-to-date with changes to export licences or legislation.

Training and seminars

Sign up for one of our scheduled training courses on export control compliance, or request bespoke seminars on specific aspects of UK export controls.





      
        
    Published 31 March 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Export controls on academic research
        Exporting military or dual-use technology: definitions
        Training on export control compliance
        Applying for export licences using SPIRE
        Export controls: military goods, software and technology

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Export controls and licensing

  


  

  


    
  


    