
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK approach to international data transfers
  

  
  

  
    
  A mission statement setting out the UK approach to adequacy assessments and international data transfers, along with the UK manual for undertaking assessments, guidance for the UK manual for undertaking assessments and a map illustrating priority countries.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      26 August 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    International data transfers: building trust, delivering growth and firing up innovation
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Manual template
    
        PDF, 213KB, 11 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Manual guidance
    
        PDF, 287KB, 25 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    UK data partnership map
    
        JPEG, 1.7MB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@dcms.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The mission statement, with a ministerial foreword, sets out the importance of international data transfers and the UK’s pro-growth approach to striking new adequacy agreements and implementing more efficient transfer tools.

The UK adequacy manual provides a framework that informs the technical and systematic assessment of data protection standards in other countries. Its structure, consistency across all assessments and the process underpinning it will enable multiple assessments to take place simultaneously, supporting the government’s ambitions to take a more internationally scalable approach to data transfers.

The publication of technical information on our process and framework for adequacy will support our ambition to be open and to provide trust.



        
      

      
    Published 26 August 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        UK Government response to the European Court of Justice decision in the Schrems II case
        CDEI publishes its first report on public sector data sharing
        National Data Strategy monitoring and evaluation update
        National Data Strategy Forum
        Digital Regulation: Driving growth and unlocking innovation

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government efficiency, transparency and accountability

  


  

  


    
  


    