The pace and magnitude of the coronavirus outbreak has left companies struggling to keep up: just when they figure out one problem, the entire landscape changes. This dynamic can quickly cause teams to lose sight of their overarching goals and react tactically—a recipe for failure in a crisis.
    
    
Even companies well versed in managing risk and responding to disruption have been overwhelmed by the COVID-19 pandemic. In this podcast, Mihir Mysore, the leader of McKinsey’s Crisis Response practice, discusses a proven model, the crisis nerve center: a dedicated team that monitors external developments, adjusts strategy to meet changing conditions, and executes rapidly. A nerve center consists of four elements—what Mysore refers to as the four Ds:
    Discover: understand the situation in the most proactive way possible. 
    Design: develop the portfolio of strategic actions. 
    Decide: focus on making decisions faster and better.
    Deliver: emphasize outcomes and results over processes.
For companies seeking to build a new capability or enhance an existing function to respond to the pandemic, Mysore answers critical questions that can guide their approach: 
    What are the elements of a disruption that make a crisis nerve center critical? 
    How do the four Ds work together to enable an effective response? 
    What attributes should companies look for in a person to lead the crisis nerve center? 
For more details, please listen to the podcast or read the full transcript below. Podcast transcript Hello and welcome. You are listening to a podcast by McKinsey & Company focused on COVID-19 response. This is Amanda Schmitt, global risk learning manager at McKinsey & Company. Today, I’ll be speaking with Mihir Mysore, who is the leader of McKinsey’s Crisis Response Service Line and is based in Houston, Texas.Today, Mihir will be speaking with us about nerve centers and how they are vital to the crisis management and recovery process. Mihir, first question for you: What have we heard from companies through the first weeks of the COVID-19 crisis? We have a few things that are pretty consistent. You know, one is beyond, there is a lot of curiosity on the virus itself, how it’s spreading. There is a lot of focus on economically what that means and trying to understand more of that. But on the personal level, what a lot of clients are telling us very clearly is actually that they are overwhelmed.They’re telling us that by the time they figure out what the problem is, it changes. They’re telling that they really like their teams, but frequently, they find that their teams are drowning in actions, drowning in tactics. And no one really knows if the hundreds of actions that they are doing add up to something that feels like a meaningful response, and if they’re truly moving the ball forward or if they’re all just engaging in activity. Right? They had all of these business-continuity plans, right? In some cases, those business-continuity plans might work, but many of them aren’t really geared for something that’s as disruptive, as fast-moving, as this virus is. OK. So how would clients think about setting up a response to COVID-19? It’s a great question. I think given that we are now a few weeks into the conversation about COVID-19—into some of the response—by this point, many companies have what I would call a basic engine dealing with the immediate execution.In addition to that, though, what companies are increasingly sensing the need for is what we term a nerve center. And this is a mechanism that builds on top of your basic delivery engine to really make sure that the company is preparing for and responding to what comes next, versus responding to what has happened.Mihir, you’ve touched on this briefly, but can you define for us, what is a nerve center?: A nerve center is a team that is dedicated to helping an institution figure out the best way to digest external information and to drive actionable implications for how they should proceed in a crisis. The design of a nerve center essentially contains four elements. We call them the four Ds: discover, design, decide, and deliver. Discover refers to understanding the situation in the most proactive way possible. Right? Really understanding, what is the truth out there? And how do you interpret that truth? Design refers to the development of the portfolio of actions: strategic actions that a company needs to take. Decide refers to the team that focuses on how decisions get made, and make sure that they are made faster and made better. And then, finally, deliver refers to the team that focuses specifically on outcome over processes, which is delivering results.While all four elements of the nerve center are very important, 80 percent of the nerve-center staff is likely going to be focused on delivery.And there are three conditions under which a nerve center needs to exist. One is that the company faces a disruption, including a crisis. The crisis may have already arrived, or it may be imminent. The second condition when you might need a nerve center is that the situation is unfamiliar territory, which means that this is what Professor Dutch Leonard at Harvard calls, “high-novelty situations.” And this means that this is not something that the company has faced before, right? Compare this, for example, with oil and gas companies that around the world, as a part of their operations, face many minor oil spills every day. So the muscle to clean up the oil spill is well developed in every oil and gas operating company. And so you know, for them, that becomes a routine emergency.And then, finally, the disruption is high velocity, which means that the company does not have enough time to really process and understand what’s coming at them. And they do not know how to interpret the threat using the means that they’re familiar with. Mihir, what does the architecture for the minimum viable nerve center look like? So, as we discussed before, there are four different work streams that we have seen clients set up. And each of these work streams are actually teams in and of themselves. The first team is workforce protection. The second team is supply-chain stabilization. The third is customer transparency and support. And the fourth is cash and financial stabilization. These four teams are primarily meant to execute something very quickly.Then you have the scenario-planning team, which is the discovery team. And this is primarily responsible for looking ahead, trying to understand which way the economic scenario might go, and then defining what the trigger points are, potentially, for actions.The third part of this, which is design, is more about coming up with a portfolio of actions as well as trigger points for when those actions should be done. The bulk of these will be strategic actions rather than targeted, tactical actions.And then, finally, you have the decide team. And the decide team is more of the integrated operations team that mixes a few different skill sets, but it focuses on ensuring elevated decision authority, ensuring an tight operating cadence that allows decisions to be made faster, as well as risk maps and situation reports that can be done quickly.So those are the four types of teams that are part of this. That may also come with an advisory panel of external experts that provide suggestions for both the scenario-planning teams as well as the strategic-moves team, as well as a board subcommittee that the leadership team might report in to as a way of keeping the board fully informed during a fast-moving situation. OK, Mihir, how does a nerve center actually work in practice?: You know, when people set up nerve centers, they are focused primarily on what we would call “deliver,” right? Which is the most familiar part of the nerve center. It is the closest to what companies would call a transformation office, which they would have done when having one of their transformations. And this is a part of the team, a part of the nerve center where the goals are clear and the team is focused on achieving them. The goals could be something like supply-chain stabilization, things like this.The problem, though, in a crisis—which is a different from a regular initiative or a regular transformation—is that goals need to change as the situation evolves. And what we find for most of these delivery teams is that they end up not updating those goals. And that just makes all of the teams become extremely tactical. And you can go weeks where teams feel like they’re drifting—they’re doing 100 different initiatives; none of them seem to be working. And that is because the situation has shifted, but the goals for these teams hasn’t changed.And so what you need to do in order to combat that issue is to invest in three teams that actually are capable of interpreting the external environment and translating them into practical goals that the teams can follow. And we find that the minimum way in which you can do this is by the addition of three other teams. Right? So it may feel like a lot, but it’s important.The first team is what we call the discover team. That team’s job is to look at external environment, interpret the external environment correctly, and provide the rest of the organization with one planning scenario that they can then use to act on the basis of. They may consider, by the way, multiple planning scenarios. And the strategy team will take a lot of those planning scenarios. But there’s a big difference between a world in which you have a 20 percent revenue drop and an 80 percent revenue drop. Many scenario teams say, “Oh, it could be 20 percent. It could be 80 percent.” But that doesn’t give the planning team and the execution team much to do with. So what we want them to say is, “In your planning scenario, you should use 40 percent as the planning basis.” And they have the rationale for that. That can change, but that’s the scenario.Then you have a design team. And the job of the design team is fundamentally to think about what the future could look like as a result of the scenario. What’s the implication on the company? And what is a proportionate response to each of these different scenarios, each of these different situations that the company could mount?And the output of this design team is what we call a portfolio of strategic actions. Think of it almost like a staircase. And that portfolio of strategic actions going from no direct moves to extremely high-impact moves.And so in practice, what happens is that your discover team, quote-unquote, “hands over” to your design team, who then comes up with a set of strategic actions that they have to consider. The design team then hands over—when they decide to trigger a particular—the design team then keeps these portfolios of actions and makes the decision on when to actually trigger a particular strategic action. Once the decision is made to trigger a particular strategic action, it gets handed down to the deliver teams as a clear goal that they then have to deliver against.: Mihir, how would you recommend choosing a team for the nerve center?: The short answer is that one of the most important decisions is how do you choose the leader who will lead this team? And typically, we find that these leaders are insiders. I was speaking to a senior executive who said, “I would never choose someone to lead a nerve-center team who hasn’t experienced a professional or personal tragedy in their lives, because they don’t understand what it feels like to be beaten down and then work their way back up.”And we think that is an important quality. We find that people that have been superstars throughout their lives are not necessarily the best choices for leading such nerve centers, because they haven’t built yet, potentially, the temperament. Some of them, you might get lucky and some of them might deliver exceptionally well. But many have not yet built the temperament to take the hit, if you will, and then dust themselves off and get off to the races again. So those sorts of temperamental qualities—together with other qualities about the ability to get things done in a competent way—things like that is critical.For the rest of team, what you really want is, you want to choose the leaders of each of these teams very carefully. And you want these leaders to be outcome-based leaders, which means that you can’t expect them to adhere to a certain framework, a certain process, a certain skill. Those are the sorts of things that make things go tactical quickly. What you want is you want somebody to whom you can say, “I need this outcome for the sake of the company.” Of course, we have to abide by regulations and values, responsibility to our people and society. But you have to innovate in ways and do what you need to do to ensure that this goal gets achieved. That kind of broad definition is ultimately what is—you need leaders that can do that.The only other thing that I could say—I would say, in terms of the nerve-center team, is you have to be very explicit about choosing a few people that are going to be your decision makers within the nerve center. And you have to be very clear that everyone else has a voice, but they are advisers.What happens frequently in a nerve center is that you have 25, 30 people—all of whom, it feels like, have an equal voice. And in order to have any action getting done, you need everybody’s approval. And that really slows things down. Because a consensus-based format—while that might be absolutely the right answer—it usually is not the right answer when it comes to a crisis. Everyone does have a voice, but that is the voice of an adviser. And they should make it heard. But ultimately, the responsibility for the decision needs to lie with two, three, four executives, and it needs to be clear who they are.: OK, Mihir, to wrap things up, what would you say are the two or three things you want everyone to remember from this podcast?: Number one, don’t design nerve centers for the problems that you see today. Design nerve centers for the problems that are going to come your way tomorrow. Number two, don’t choose people for the nerve center based on expertise or their knowledge of a process. Choose them based on their knowledge, based on their ability to achieve outcomes and their temperament. Number three, make sure that your nerve center is as simple as possible. The more complex, the more I can give you a guarantee that it will not work.