

The NHS is under pressure to meet the changing demand for services with limited resources. Innovations spanning technologies, products, services and new ways of working provide opportunities to respond creatively and effectively to growing health demands across all age groups. RAND Europe and the University of Manchester were asked to conduct a study on the potential of innovation to help deliver an efficient and effective healthcare service.




Read Online

Innovating for improved healthcare
Policy and practice for a thriving NHS
by Sonja Marjanovic, Marlene Altenhofer, Lucy Hocking, Molly Morgan Jones, Sarah Parks, Ioana Ghiga, Carla Cox, Katerina Galai, Tom Ling
Related Topics: Health Care Technology, Patient Experience, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy, United Kingdom
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for FreeFull Document

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


1.2 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.

Executive Summary

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.3 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.

Annexes

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


18.8 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

How do organisations working in and closely with the NHS perceive and understand innovation, and how does this influence their actions?
Who drives and contributes to innovation and how might successful innovation have greater scale, scope and impact?
What practical changes to policy, culture and behaviour can support system-wide improvements to innovation pathways?
What practical changes to policy, culture and behaviour can support system-wide improvements to innovation pathways?




Publicly financed healthcare systems around the world are facing increasing pressures to deliver high-quality care with limited resources. These pressures are accentuated by the need to respond to a growing and changing nature of demand in light of factors such as aging populations, a growing burden of chronic diseases and comorbidities and drives towards more personalised treatment provision. Innovations spanning technologies, products, services and new ways of working provide opportunities to respond creatively and effectively to growing to the challenges facing healthcare systems. However, such innovations need to be accomplished within well-recognised resource constraints, and both policymakers and wider stakeholders often lack the appropriate information, evidence, capabilities, resources, relationships, incentives and accountabilities to effectively support the development and uptake of innovations that can improve the quality of healthcare services and benefit patients. Against this context, and in light of the challenges facing the NHS in England, RAND Europe and the University of Manchester were asked to conduct a study on the potential of innovation to help deliver an efficient and effective healthcare service.
Key Findings

The report expands on key findings as they relate to the current landscape for innovating in healthcare, key developments and capacity-building priorities. These relate to the following themes:
Diverse social and technical skills and leadership capabilities are needed to help create an environment in which innovation can be effectively managed and implemented. We detail priority areas for capability building and how this could be pursed, including through evolution of the medical education curriculum and continuing professional development opportunities, the embedding of innovation champions into the healthcare system, and training for the private sector on how to effectively engage with the NHS. 
The system of motivations and incentives for engaging with innovation has strengthened in recent years, but there has been less progress with ensuring accountability for innovation. This could be tackled through embedding innovation into regulatory regimes (but not mandating it) and through greater clarity and specificity about innovation-related job roles in provider organisations.

Decision makers across the health system have differing information and evidence needs and a national framework and infrastructure for overseeing and coordinating information and evidence flows needs to be established.

There are many initiatives and networks focusing on innovation but there is a need for better coordinating their activities. We detail the types of actions that can support this, including ensuring greater clarity on the respective roles and remits of different networks, more collaborative working and efforts to at a policy level reconcile goals for
The current landscape for patient and public involvement and engagement (PPIE) has evolved but there is a need for a national strategy and implementation plan for PPIE in innovation, based on a set of principles that are detailed in our report.

A variety of funding schemes support innovation in the healthcare system, but there is a need to improve the coordination, sustainability and stability of funding flows, including through closer collaboration between funders of innovation, research and healthcare improvement efforts, and through a focus on commissioning for solutions (i.e. combinations of innovations and not individual products or technologies exclusively).

Policymakers need to pay more attention to implementation and success criteria at policy
There is a need for more sophisticated evaluation evidence, and we detail the types of information that can support this.




 Related Products 









News Release
Tackling Staffing and Funding Issues in the NHS Is Necessary for Improvement but Not Enough. To Support a More Sustainable Healthcare Service Innovation Needs to Be Embedded into Its Mindset, Practices and Policy

Jan 29, 2020










Research Brief
How can policy and practice support an innovating healthcare system?

Jan 26, 2020
Sonja Marjanovic @SonjaCambs, Marlene Altenhofer, et al.










Project
Innovating for improved healthcare: the current context and ways forward for quality and productivity in the NHS

Jan 27, 2020







Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction

Chapter Two
Supporting an innovating health system: insights from the broader landscape

Chapter Three
Study findings: presentation and overview

Chapter Four
Strengthening skills, capabilities and leadership for innovation

Chapter Five
Ensuring appropriate motivations and accountabilities

Chapter Six
Improving the information and evidence environment

Chapter Seven
Nurturing effective relationships and networks regionally and nationally

Chapter Eight
Facilitating meaningful patient and public involvement and engagement with innovation

Chapter Nine
Developing a funding and commissioning landscape to support innovation across the pathway

Chapter Ten
Better aligning policy design with a consideration of implementation requirements and success criteria

Chapter Eleven
Measuring innovation uptake and impact: how can we know whether we are succeeding?

Chapter Twelve
In reflection: issues to consider when taking forward actions to support an innovating health system




Research conducted by

RAND Europe



The research described in this report was prepared for the National Institute for Health Research and conducted by RAND Europe.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 219
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR2711
Document Number: RR-2711-DH
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Health Care TechnologyPatient ExperienceScience, Technology, and Innovation PolicyUnited Kingdom

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Marjanovic, Sonja, Marlene Altenhofer, Lucy Hocking, Molly Morgan Jones, Sarah Parks, Ioana Ghiga, Carla Cox, Katerina Galai, and Tom Ling, Innovating for improved healthcare: Policy and practice for a thriving NHS. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2711.html.
Marjanovic, Sonja, Marlene Altenhofer, Lucy Hocking, Molly Morgan Jones, Sarah Parks, Ioana Ghiga, Carla Cox, Katerina Galai, and Tom Ling, Innovating for improved healthcare: Policy and practice for a thriving NHS, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2711-DH, 2020. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2711.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



