







Gaps in Toxic Industrial Chemical Model Systems
Improvements and Changes Over Past 10 YearsPublished in: Process Safety Progress (2021). doi: 10.1002/prs.12289 Posted on RAND.org on July 21, 2021
by Steven R. Hanna, Thomas Mazzola, Joseph C. Chang, Thomas Spicer, Simon Gant, Rachel Batt
Related Topics: Accident Investigation, Chemistry, Environmental Science and Technology, Modeling and Simulation

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at The American Institute of Chemical EngineersThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








To assess the hazards of the releases of toxic industrial chemicals (TICs) to the atmosphere, comprehensive model systems are often used, which begin with the scenario definition and end with an estimate of health risk. In 2008 and 2010, the US Department of Homeland Security and Defense Threat Reduction Agency sponsored reports that identified knowledge gaps in TIC modeling. The current paper discusses which of the knowledge gaps were satisfactorily resolved in the past 10 years by new theoretical and experimental research, such as the 2010 and 2015–2016 Jack Rabbit field experiments. For example, the linked source emissions and transport and dispersion (T&D) models have been shown, in comparisons with Jack Rabbit II observations, to not have large mean biases. Consequently, the T&D models are less likely to be the cause of model system over predictions of casualties observed after large TIC accidental releases, such as the Festus, Macdona, and Graniteville chlorine railcar incidents. It may be that the deposition models and/or the health effects models still need improvement. In addition to comments on the knowledge gaps identified 10 years ago, a few new knowledge gaps are addressed, such as indoor T&D and deposition, and estimating the magnitude of the saturation deposition value for various substrates and chemicals.

Access further information on this document at The American Institute of Chemical EngineersThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

Homeland Security Research Division



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Steven Hanna, Thomas Mazzola, Joseph Chang, Thomas Spicer, Simon Gant, Rachel BattPublisher: The American Institute of Chemical Engineers
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 16
Document Number: EP-68683
Year: 2021
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Accident InvestigationChemistryEnvironmental Science and TechnologyModeling and Simulation

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




