

San Diego State University and three universities in the country of Georgia partnered to improve the quality of university education in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics as part of a U.S. government investment and funds from the Government of Georgia. The authors evaluate the development of the partnership, implementation of the program, perceived effectiveness of the program, and partnership sustainability into the future.




Read Online

Georgia II STEM Higher Education Interim Evaluation Report
by Charles A. Goldman, Rita T. Karam, Katya Migacheva, Matthew Cefalu, Monica Rico, Katheryn Giglio
Related Topics: Educational Program Evaluation, Georgia (country), International Diplomacy, International Education, Postsecondary Education, STEM Education
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


2.3 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

How was the partnership established and carried out? How did it change over time?Were the activities implemented through the project aligned with the program design, as documented in the logic model?How do SDSU and comparison group students view their programs?To what extent are the project activities sustainable?



More than ever, nations around the world understand that science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) skills are key to driving economic growth and overall competitiveness. On July 26, 2013, the United States, through the Millennium Challenge Corporation, signed a five-year, $140-million compact with the Government of Georgia (GoG) to develop human capital, advance economic growth, and reduce poverty in the country. The Georgia II STEM Higher Education Project is one part of this compact. It involves an investment of $30 million from the United States and additional funds from Georgia aimed at improving the quality of Georgian university education in STEM fields. The GoG established the Millennium Challenge Account - Georgia to direct all implementation under the compact.
San Diego State University (SDSU) partnered with three Georgian public universities — Tbilisi State University, Georgian Technical University, and Ilia State University — to fulfill these goals. SDSU offers its U.S. bachelor's degrees, taught in English, in facilities of the three partner universities.
The authors of this interim report examine (1) the development of the partnership, (2) implementation of SDSU program, (3) perceived effectiveness of the program, and (4) partnership sustainability into the future. The final report, expected in 2023, will reexamine these four areas and (5) student outcomes and (6) post-compact economic rate of return.
Additional resources for this report are available on the Millennium Challenge Corporation website (data.mcc.gov).
Key Findings

Establishing, organizing, and supporting partnerships was challenging, but partnerships improved over timeThe activities related to the delivery of curriculum, faculty training, and building capacity were implemented jointly between SDSU and the three Georgian public universities.
The partnerships tended to be between SDSU and individual institutions instead of a single group ready to address common issues and goals.
Program implementation had both successes and challengesAt the beginning of the initiative, there was a significant struggle to enroll the planned number of students.
The compact funds were used to renovate the facilities at the three partner universities.
SDSU also built the capacity of Georgian faculty by providing them with extensive professional development and classroom experience in the SDSU program.
SDSU supported the partner universities as they prepared their STEM programs for international accreditation.
SDSU student experiences show satisfaction with facilities but less with coursework and faculty supportThe majority of SDSU-Georgia students were highly satisfied with the facilities and equipment provided by the SDSU program but were less satisfied with some aspects of the program.
Women and men generally had similar views of their programs, but women were less satisfied with opportunities for internships and job placement.
The partnership may be sustainable in ways beyond the programAll partners are interested in sustaining STEM programs and their relationships after the compact closes.
SDSU is considering a program that would allow students to earn an SDSU degree in the future through SDSU online as a supplement to their partner university accredited degree.


Recommendations

Continue to invest in training Georgian faculty.
Encourage STEM employment opportunities for women.
Promote buy-in and support for international accreditation.
Revise government policies to sustain internationally accredited programs.



Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction and Background

Chapter Two
Overview of the Georgia II STEM Higher Education Project

Chapter Three
Evaluation Design

Chapter Four
Establishing, Organizing, and Supporting Partnerships

Chapter Five
Implementing the Program and Overcoming Challenges

Chapter Six
Student Experiences in SDSU Georgia and Comparison Group Programs: Affordability, Employment Status, Perceived Quality, and Future Plans

Chapter Seven
Initial Sustainability Analysis

Chapter Eight
Conclusion

Appendix A
Photographs of Tbilisi Campus Facilities

Appendix B
Data Collection Summary and Timeline

Appendix C
Survey Completion, Tracer Study Balance, and Power Estimates

Appendix D
Study Administrative Information

Appendix E
Additional Figures

Appendix F
Stakeholder Comments and Responses




Research conducted by

RAND Education and Labor



This study was sponsored by the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) and conducted by RAND Education and Labor.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 112
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA363-1
Document Number: RR-A363-1
Year: 2021
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

Educational Program EvaluationGeorgia (country)International DiplomacyInternational EducationPostsecondary EducationSTEM Education

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Goldman, Charles A., Rita T. Karam, Katya Migacheva, Matthew Cefalu, Monica Rico, and Katheryn Giglio, Georgia II STEM Higher Education Interim Evaluation Report. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA363-1.html.
Goldman, Charles A., Rita T. Karam, Katya Migacheva, Matthew Cefalu, Monica Rico, and Katheryn Giglio, Georgia II STEM Higher Education Interim Evaluation Report, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A363-1, 2021. As of December 16, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA363-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



