
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UK Prosperity Fund for Colombia
  

  
    
      
    
        
            English
        
        
            Español
        
    
  

  


  
    
  This programme aims to support economic development, unlock economic opportunities and lead growth in Colombia’s regions.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign & Commonwealth Office and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      10 August 2018
      Last updated
      
        30 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Colombia Prosperity Programme: Unlocking economic opportunities in post-conflict and conflict-affected regions 
    
        PDF, 1.72MB, 66 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email fcdo.correspondence@fcdo.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Memorandum of Understanding: UK government and Financiera de Desarrollo Territorial S.A. - Findeter
    
        ODT, 284KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Memorandum of Understanding: UK government and Corporación Andina de Fomento 'CAF'
    
        ODT, 326KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Amendment 1 to Memorandum of Understanding: UK government and Financiera de Desarrollo Territorial S.A. - Findeter
    
        ODT, 20.3KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Amendment 2 to Memorandum of Understanding: UK government and Financiera de Desarrollo Territorial S.A. - Findeter
    
        ODT, 13.4KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Amendment 3 to Memorandum of Understanding: UK government and Financiera de Desarrollo Territorial S.A. - Findeter
    
        ODT, 14.3KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Memorandum of Understanding: Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office and Innovate UK
    
        ODT, 1.03MB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Memorandum of Understanding: UK government and Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional - FDN
    
        ODT, 105KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Colombia Prosperity Fund programme annual review 2018 to 2019
    
        ODT, 388KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Colombia Prosperity Fund programme annual review 2019 to 2020
    
        ODT, 491KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Colombia Prosperity Fund Programme annual review 2020
    
        ODT, 610KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The UK Prosperity Fund for Colombia, worth £25.5 million over 5 years (2017 to 2022), is designed to support economic development, unlock economic opportunities and drive growth in the country’s post-conflict and conflict-affected regions. It will benefit more than 3 million people with a focus on women and girls in Colombia’s poorest regions.

The programme is expected to result in £1.99 billion of primary benefits to Colombia over 10 years. The potential secondary benefits to the UK of Prosperity Fund engagement, set within the context of a peaceful, prosperous Colombia, are £265 million by 2026.

The main objectives of the programme are to:


  achieve inclusive growth, poverty reduction and gender equality
  contribute to improving the commercial environment so that international business, including UK companies, can compete favourably in new markets


It will do this by targeting three sectors across post conflict and conflict-affected regions:


  institutional strengthening
  infrastructure
  agriculture


The 3 delivering partners of the programme will be:


  the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF)
  the Colombian Financial Institution for Development of the Regions (Findeter)
  Innovate UK – an agency of the UK’s Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Department (BEIS).


UK Prosperity Fund for Colombia

Why Colombia
Colombia is the fourth largest economy in Latin America, achieving 4 % average growth per year for the last decade. But Colombia remains the world’s seventh most unequal country, where one in three households is considered poor, with poverty predominant in secondary cities and rural areas in conflict affected regions. The benefits of peace in Colombia are projected to increase growth by up to 2 % per year and triple FDI within a decade.

Where in Colombia


  cities: Cartagena, Ibague, Manizales, Santa Marta, Valledupar and Villavicencio
  departments: Antioquia, Atlántico,  Caldas, Cundinamarca, Magdalena, Meta, Santander and Valle del Cauca


Activities

Institutional Strengthening


  regional competitiveness: strengthen economic development in Colombia’s regions by improving their competitiveness. Build government capacity in up to 8 regions; deliver up to 24 specific competitiveness projects and train up to 200 officials in project development and management
  open, public procurement: more transparent, less corrupt public procurement in Colombia’s regions. Build government capacity to implement the International Open Procurement Standards in up to 8 regions and train up to 200 officials in open procurement and its effective implementation
  corporate governance reform of Colombia’s National Infrastructure Agency: improve ANI’s corporate governance standards in line with UK best practice. Design a new corporate governance model for ANI and pilot it over one year with an evaluation afterwards


Infrastructure

  urban development: strengthen SMART urban development in Colombia’s second tier cities. Build government capacity to implement existing urban master plans in up to 10 cities; deliver up to 30 urban development projects; and train up to 200 officials on SMART urban development
  rail development: support the rehabilitation of Colombia’s narrow-gauge rail network. Complete  Colombia’s  national Rail Master Plan and develop the regulatory framework; complete four rail feasibility studies and structure at least two of them for market


Agriculture

  agri-insurance: develop and roll out agri-insurance to Colombia’s smallholders and agricultural micro and small enterprises (MSEs). Create and implement a new IT-based Risk Information System, design and market test agri-insurance products and services in three pilot projects
  Agri-Tech Catalyst Challenge Fund: increase productivity and incomes for Colombia’s smallholders and agricultural MSEs through adoption of agri-innovations and technologies from the UK. Through a competitive bidding process fund up to 10 agri-innovation projects, which either pilot new innovations and technologies or develop the Colombian market for existing ones



View the Colombia Prosperity Fund evaluation reports.





        
      

      
    Published 10 August 2018
    Last updated 30 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 September 2021
              New documents added: annual review 2020.
            
            
              26 March 2020
              Added annual review for 2019 to 2020.
            
            
              8 October 2019
              A new MoU has been added to the documents list.
            
            
              21 June 2019
              Memorandum of Understanding amendments added, alongside new Innovate UK one.
            
            
              29 November 2018
              Programme memorandums of understanding added
            
            
              10 August 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Colombia Prosperity Fund evaluation reports

  




      

    Collection

  


        Prosperity programming: former Prosperity Fund programmes

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Transport
        Economic growth in developing countries
        Overseas aid transparency
        Regional and local government
        Trade and investment

  




      

    World locations

  


        Colombia

  


  

  


    
  


    