The Belfer Center has a dual mission: (1) to provide leadership in advancing policy-relevant knowledge about the most important challenges of international security; and (2) to prepare future generations of leaders for these arenas. This means not shying away from the most difficult and controversial issues of our time, like how best to change America’s national security posture to fit a changing world. This also means giving a platform to our students who are eager to join the ranks of the next generation of national security leaders.The Defense Playbook for Campaigns fully takes up this challenge, with policy guidance for candidates of either party seeking guidance on regional affairs, military technology, and Pentagon reform. None of these issues are easy, and most are controversial. However, these papers provide a blueprint for candidates searching for fact-based, rigorous, bipartisan analysis on the most pressing national security issues of our time. The topics were proposed by our students, who felt that each area could benefit from injecting fresh thought and potential reform. The most important thing for the future of our country’s national security will be its ability to debate potential responses to the security challenges that we face, and to emerge from this conversation with the best ideas implemented. These papers are intended as a substantive addition to that conversation.—, Co-Director Belfer Center  The 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) is predicated on a single organizing principle: America’s military pre-eminence is rapidly eroding. This is not a new concept. For years, experts have warned that the economic and technological advancements of U.S. adversaries, coupled with the 2008 financial crisis and America’s focus on peripheral conflicts, have caused a decline in America’s military dominance. In this context, the advances of near-peer competitors such as China and Russia have created plausible “theories of victory” in potential conflicts across Eastern Europe and East Asia. Competitors’ unaddressed improvements in strategic innovation, economic investment, and dual-use technology increases the risk of conflict and strains the U.S. alliance system. It is urgent that the United States reestablish and maintain credible deterrents against these near-peer competitors. After decades of focusing on post-Cold War ‘shaping’ operations, the American military needs to reinvigorate for full spectrum great power competition.This report is intended as a blueprint on how to begin that process from graduate students at the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard University. Contained inside are 12 memorandums. Each provides a high-level overview and specific recommendations on a key issue of American defense policy. Each memorandum can be read on its own or as part of the broader package. The topics range from regional defense analysis, emerging technology, and cyber warfare, to budgetary process reforms. The papers are organized in broad themes, with the first section focusing on regional conflicts, the second section addressing broad technological issues, and the third section covering internal U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) reform. At the highest level, these papers recommend that the next administration:   Prepare the country for escalating competition and potential high-end conflict, by:  Improve America’s readiness to respond rapidly to further aggression against our partners and allies in Europe, by:  Ensure the successful consolidation of military gains in Iraq and Afghanistan while transitioning to a more resource-sustainable approach in these ongoing conflict areas, by:  Strengthen alignment between the US and foreign military partners, by:
Reaffirming public commitment to alliances  Improve the way in which America navigates hybrid conflict, by: Secure U.S. advantage in emerging technologies with military applications, by: Underscore the criticality of ongoing competition in this domain while ensuring that America retains its competitive edge in space, by:  Direct the modernization of the nation’s nuclear arsenal, by:  Improve the creation, spending, and oversight of America’s defense budget, by: Improve the DOD acquisition process, by:  Ensure the DOD maintains constant readiness to fight peer competitors, by:  Ensure the Pentagon has the necessary posture to secure national interests, by:
Prioritizing footprints and agreements in the Indo-Pacific We hope that these papers will prove useful to campaigns and to others working for the future of US national security.  They are addressed to future administrations, regardless of political party. The reinvigoration of America’s deterrence cannot be accomplished without sustained bipartisan support and reliable execution. This consistency is a difficult demand but is one that must be met if America is to defend its national interests for generations to come. We believe that America can and will succeed in this new era of global challenges.—Casey Corcoran, Allison Lazarus, and the Defense Playbook student team  is a dual-degree Juris Doctorate and Master of Public Policy candidate at Harvard Law School and Harvard Kennedy School. He previously served as an officer in the United States Army.  is a joint Master in Public Policy and Master in Business Administration candidate at Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard Business School. She previously worked on the staff of the Senate Armed Services Committee and for McKinsey & Company.  is a Master in Public Policy candidate at Harvard Kennedy School. She previously worked as a consultant on cybersecurity risk and strategy.  is a Master in Public Policy candidate at Harvard Kennedy School. He previously worked for David Gergen at the Center for Public Leadership.  received his Master in Public Policy degree from Harvard Kennedy School. He is an officer in the United States Navy.  is a Master in Public Policy candidate at Harvard Kennedy School. He is an officer in the United States Army. is a Master in Public Policy candidate at Harvard Kennedy School. She previously worked at the Department of Defense.  is a Juris Doctorate candidate at Harvard Law School. She previously worked as a legal analyst and for private defense contractors and law firms.  is a joint Master in Public Policy and Master in Business Administration candidate at Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard Business School. He previously served in the United States Marine Corps. received his Master in Management Science degree from Stanford University. He is an officer in the United States Navy.  is a Juris Doctorate candidate at Harvard Law School. He previously served as an officer in the United States Army. 