
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Call for nominations: Chair, Space Technology Advisory Committee
  

  
  

  
    
  The UK Space Agency are seeking nominations for the position of Chair to the Space Technology Advisory Committee (STAC).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      30 September 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
     Call for nominations: Chair to the Space Technology Advisory Committee (STAC) - PDF
    
        PDF, 453KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
     Call for nominations: Chair to the Space Technology Advisory Committee (STAC) - ODT
    
        ODT, 74.5KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The committee provides advice and supports the Agency on matters relating to Space technology development programmes, (principally UK involvement in UK technology developments, Potential spin-out applications; BEIS industrial strategy and priorities; UK, ESA and other mission priorities; the wider social and industrial context and potential for developing the UK skills base.



        
      

      
    Published 30 September 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Space

  


  

  


    
  


    