
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge
  

  
  
  
      
  We’re taking innovative action to reduce the impact of crime on society.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      22 April 2021
      Last updated
      
        15 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          The Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge (PLIC)

        
        
          FAQs

        
        
          Keep informed

        
        
          Webinars

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge (PLIC)

The Prison Leavers Project aims to develop innovative new solutions to break the cycle of reoffending. The project has three distinct strands: national, cross-sector teams testing new ways to address the issues that can drive reoffending; a grant fund for local leaders and agencies to test shared approaches to reduce re-offending causing crime locally, and the Innovation Challenge.

The Innovations Challenge aims to harness innovation from the tech sector to develop new technological tools and solutions that will help prison leavers stay on the straight and narrow, reducing the harms associated with crime.
It is run as a two-phased Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI) competition.

Phase 1 – September 2021 – October 2021

9 selected companies have received Government funding of up to £25,000 each to prototype their solution.

Phase 2 – November 2021 – March 2022

Up to 4 selected companies will receive Government funding of up to £350,000, as well as mentorship support, to develop their solution and design a pilot. Once set up, companies will run their pilots in ‘steady state’ for 1 year.

PLIC Innovators

In May 2021, we put six ‘challenge statements’ to the tech sector. We used challenge statements to communicate the problems we are asking the market to solve. We framed each problem as an open question or statement in order to attract innovators and a wide range of solutions. Bids which achieved a minimum threshold score were ranked and those which scored most highly were awarded.

Find out more about Prison Leaver needs and context associated with each challenge statement in the Additional challenge context pack (PDF, 163KB, 15 pages)

Challenge 1 – Goal tracking
Building a positive, non-criminal identity is a key step in prison leavers’ desistance from crime. So how can we enable prison leavers to track their goals, reflect on progress, and bring about positive behavioural change, either alone or with mentors?

PLIC innovators:


  Swansea University in collaboration with Include UK & The Legal Innovation Lab Wales
  Becoming X Ventures
  MyKindaFuture in partnership with St Giles Trust
  Orbital Global in partnership with The Disabilities Trust


Challenge 2 – Day of release appointments
Prison leavers’ engagement with key organisations on their day of release builds ongoing relationships with services that steer them away from reoffending. So how can we inform, coordinate, and update relevant stakeholders of a prisoner’s day of release details and key appointments?

PLIC innovators:


  Make Time Count Today
  Offploy


Challenge 3 – Data store
Lack of access to key documents and data such as ID, birth certificates and 5-year housing history prevents prison leavers from accessing jobs, housing and banking, increasing their likelihood of committing crime. So how can we enable prison leavers to collect, control and share their data with relevant stakeholders?

PLIC innovators:


  Meganexus in partnership with SWIM


Challenge 4 – Family relationships
Families are an important part of creating a positive environment that contributes to a prison leavers’ desistance from crime. So how can we support families to strengthen and sustain their relationships with prison leavers to reduce reoffending after release?

Challenge 5 – Social groups
Building new, positive community ties stops prison leavers engaging with old criminal networks after release, risking a relapse to criminal activity. So how can we connect prison leavers with relevant and beneficial social & peer-to-peer support groups?

PLIC innovators:


  Innovative Alliance


Challenge 6 – Learning difficulties and disabilities
Crucial information relating to conditions of release and services can be challenging for prison leavers with Learning Difficulties and Disabilities to fully understand, increasing the chances of reoffending. So how can we assist probation officers to manage prison leavers with Learning Difficulties and Disabilities?

PLIC innovators:


  Yalla Dev in partnership with The Shannon Trust


The specific requirements and more details on the contractual specifications can be found in the Supplier guidance (updated 28 May) (PDF, 110KB, 7 pages). Prison Leaver needs and context associated with each challenge statement in the Additional challenge context pack (PDF, 163KB, 15 pages)

FAQs

All questions and responses are available in the Frequently Asked Questions.

Keep informed

Updates will be added to this page as the competition progresses.

Visit the Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge blog

Webinars

Find out more in these interactive sessions giving an overview of the needs and requirements of proposed solutions to the challenge.

There are no upcoming webinars.

Previous webinars

Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge Launch Briefing

Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge Launch Briefing

Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge - Evaluation

Prison Leavers Evaluation Webinar

Read about our privacy information





      
        
    Published 22 April 2021
    Last updated 15 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              15 September 2021
              Information about PLIC innovators added.
            
            
              7 September 2021
              Updated challenge information.
            
            
              22 June 2021
              The competition is now closed.
            
            
              11 June 2021
              Application deadline extended to 16 June 2021.
            
            
              28 May 2021
              Supplier guidance updated
            
            
              19 May 2021
              Additional challenge context pack updated
            
            
              12 May 2021
              Information about webinars added.
            
            
              10 May 2021
              Supplier guidance document updated.
            
            
              10 May 2021
              Updated to include application information.
            
            
              22 April 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Prison Leavers Project: improving outcomes for prison leavers
        Prison Leavers Innovation Challenge: FAQs
        Criminal legal aid review
        Farming statistics - provisional arable crop areas as at 1 June 2019, England
        The Myths and Realities of Shale Gas Exploration

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law
        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    