
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    CyDR defence industry ICT accreditation and risk balance case processes
  

  
  
  
      
  Cyber Defence and Risk (CyDR) defence industry ICT accreditation and risk balance case (RBC) processes.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      12 December 2012
      Last updated
      
        8 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          
CyDR service

        
        
          Accreditation

        
        
          Risk balance cases

        
        
          Start accrediting your ICT system or registering an RBC


        
        
          Joint Security Co-ordination Centre

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

CyDR service

CyDR provides a range of support to defence and its industry partners in the area of information assurance (IA), including:


  oversight, tracking and provision of management information for all defence accreditation activity
  advice and guidance on the subject of accreditation
  assessment of evidence submitted in support of the accreditation process; e.g. risk management accreditation document sets (RMADS) and security operating procedures (SyOPs)
  final sign-off and provision of a certificate and letter of accreditation
  progression and review of risk balance cases (RBC) prior to sign-off by Ministry of Defence (MOD) Senior Information Risk Owner (SIRO)


Accreditation

Accreditation confirms that information and communication technology (ICT) systems embody appropriate security to allow MOD information to be stored and processed with an acceptable level of risk.

The Defence Assurance Risk Tool (DART), which can be accessed by anyone who possesses connectivity to the Restricted LAN Interconnect (RLI), must be used to register all ICT systems owned or used by MOD industry partners, where those systems are processing MOD owned information. These ICT systems must be accredited before use and subsequently have their security managed thereafter.

The authorities responsible for the systems requiring accreditation must ensure that this accreditation is obtained before storing or processing MOD information.

CyDR is the sponsor of the accreditation process for MOD, providing support and advice and overseeing accreditation activity across defence.  The system, or a subset of a system, requiring accreditation is known as a target of assurance (TOA).

All requests to accredit ICT are processed through the Defence Assurance Risk Tool (DART), which enables the tracking of TOAs and the provision of management information.

The DART methodology includes a triage process that takes account of risk and assigns one of the following assessment paths:


  
CyDR assessment (known as ‘Red Channel’)
  
MOD Top Level Budget Holder accreditor assessment (‘Amber Channel’)
  self assessment and provision of evidence to CyDR (‘Green Channel’)


Accreditation requires the provision of evidence and approval through the Cyber Defence and Risk (CyDR) team or delegated authority processes and will result in a DART generated certificate and letter.

The requirement to register systems for accreditation through DART is specified within Industry Security Notice (ISN) 2017/01.

Risk balance cases

Where circumstances dictate that it is necessary to carry out action that is outside of the scope of standard policy, an risk balance cases (RBC) must be raised. As with accreditation, all RBCs are registered through DART, providing the user is able to connect to the RLI.

RBCs are divided into 2 main categories:


  movements: involving the transfer of information between various locations; these were formerly referred to as ‘Fast Tracks’
  information: all other RBCs (previously called ‘Supp 12’s’)


The generic pathway for an RBC is:


  initial triage by CyDR  to determine who needs to be involved
  review and comment by nominated stakeholders; e.g. the Network Technical Authority or local security staff.
  review and comment by a CyDR  accreditor
  a final assessment by the CyDR  RBC lead
  approval by MOD SIRO or delegated authority


Start accrediting your ICT system or registering an RBC


If you have access to the RLI, you can contact UKStratComDD-CyDR-DART-Help@mod.gov.uk and request a link to DART.

If you do not have access to the RLI, you will not be able to access DART directly. In this circumstance:


  Save a copy of the relevant CyDR accreditation request or off-line RBC form to a suitable location.
  Remember that information categorised as OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE or above must not be transmitted in clear over the internet.
  Post the completed accreditation request forms to:




Service Delivery Team
CyDR, Room X007
Bazalgette Pavilion,
RAF Wyton
Huntingdon 
Cambs
PE28 2EA



Get advice and guidance on the accreditation or RBC processes in general.

Call our customer support line on 01480 446311 or 95371 4564 or email UKStratComDD-CyDR-DART-Help@mod.gov.uk.

Joint Security Co-ordination Centre

The Joint Security Co-ordination (JSyCC) enables ‘defence information assurance’ assessment through the conduct and coordination of MOD information security incident management and related risk analysis activity.

Additionally, it is a focal point for ‘information security alerts’ and associated ‘warning and response’ activities.

JSyCC are responsible for:


  operational co-ordination and management of the immediate response, warning and reporting, including the investigative oversight and follow-up actions, for all reported defence information assurance/information security incidents involving the loss, compromise or leakage of protectively marked official information and/or equipment
  operational information security risk management, trend analysis and related policy. This includes the management of the MOD Information Security Incident Reporting Scheme (MISIRS) and supporting database, together with the drafting of responses to Parliamentary Questions, Freedom of Information (FOI) requests etc
  the provision of the defence industry warning and reporting point (WARP) responsible for the coordination of the response and management of all defence industry information security incidents, including List X
  the coordination of all law enforcement and counter intelligence for information security incidents


Contact details

If you want to know more about JSyCC, use the contact details below:



JSyCC 
X017, Bazelgette Pavilion 
RAF Wyton 
Huntingdon 
Cambs, PE28 2EA 



Point of Contact: JSyCC Ops 0306 770 2187

JSyCC Duty Officer (out of hours) 07768 558 863

Email: cio-dsas-jsyccoperations@mod.gov.uk





      
        
    Published 12 December 2012
    Last updated 8 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 December 2021
              Updated the email address under 'Start accrediting your ICT system or registering an RBC'.
            
            
              30 June 2020
              Updated organisation name throughout page.
            
            
              28 February 2019
              Guidance has been updated with further contact details.
            
            
              14 November 2017
              Updated DAIS information.
            
            
              7 August 2017
              Added updated information on DAIS defence industry ICT accreditation.
            
            
              11 October 2016
              Updated contact details.
            
            
              26 August 2015
              Updated DAIS content.
            
            
              24 September 2014
              Updated name of organisation to Defence Assurance and Information Security (DAIS).
            
            
              7 March 2014
              Updated contact details
            
            
              7 February 2013
              New form added
            
            
              12 December 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        CyDR off-line forms for accreditation, risk balance cases and tooling change requests
        Industry Security Notice (ISN)
        Industry Security Notices (ISN)
        International Visits Control Office documentation
        Defence contractors guidance notes

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Defence Equipment and Support Principal Security Advisor

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    