
  
    
      Part 4: Annual accounts and external audit

    

      
        
  How academy trusts must report on their finances to give assurance to Parliament and the public about the use of resources.

      
        
          

    



































































            

      
        
          
            4.1 - 4.4  - Preparation and audit of accounts
          
        
        

    4.1 The academy trust must maintain adequate accounting records and prepare an annual report and accounts in line with the Charity Commission's Statement of Recommended Practice (SORP) and ESFA's Accounts Direction.
4.2 The accounts must be audited.
4.3 The accounting period of an academy trust will usually end on 31 August as described in its funding agreement.
4.4 The audited report and accounts must be:

  submitted to ESFA by 31 December
  published on the trust's website by 31 January
  filed with Companies House under company law, usually by 31 May
  provided to every member (under the Companies Act)
  provided to anyone who requests a copy


Find out more about:


  preparation, audit and submission of your annual accounts in the Accounts Direction and Charites SORP

  the requirement to submit an annual confirmation statement to Companies House.





      
        
          
            4.5 - 4.12  -  External auditors
          
        
        

    Appointment of external auditors
4.5 Under the Companies Act 2006, academy trusts must appoint an auditor to give an opinion on whether their annual accounts present a true and fair view of the trust's financial performance and position (appointment being by the members, other than where the Companies Act permits the trustees to appoint - for example for the trust's first period of account). Trusts should retender their external audit contract at least every five years and must consider the relevant points in 4.17 when evaluating.
4.6 The audit contract, and regularity engagement as described in 4.15, must be in writing and must not cover other services. If additional services are purchased, a separate letter of engagement must be obtained specifying the work and the fee.  Trusts should note that auditors are subject to the Financial Reporting Council’s Ethical Standard which aims to strengthen auditor independence and prevent conflict of interest where additional services are provided to a client.

Find out more about choosing an external auditor.

Removal of external auditors
4.7 The letter of engagement must allow for removal of auditors, before the expiry of the term of office, in exceptional circumstances. Proposals to remove auditors must require a majority vote of the members who must provide reasons for their decision to the board. There must be a requirement in the letter of engagement for the auditors to provide the trust with an explanation if the auditors resign, within 14 calendar days of their resignation.
4.8 The board of trustees must notify ESFA immediately of the removal or resignation of the auditors. For removal, the trust must notify ESFA of the reasons, copying to ESFA any statement received from the auditor on this matter. For resignation, the trust must copy to ESFA an explanation from the auditors. A change in auditor at the expiry of their agreed term of office does not require notification to ESFA.
Group auditors and sector account
4.9 DfE will consolidate each academy trust's accounts into a sector annual report and accounts (SARA). DfE will use audited accounts returns and other information to generate the SARA, which the National Audit Office (NAO) will audit.
4.10 As each trust is a component of the SARA, the trust must prepare the financial information requested by DfE for this purpose.
4.11 Academy trusts' auditors will be required by DfE to audit certain information, and this requirement should be incorporated within the terms of engagement.
4.12 The NAO must reach an opinion on regularity for ESFA's own accounts, and for this will draw on the regularity opinions of trusts' auditors.

Find out more about the academies sector annual report and accounts.




      
        
          
            4.13 - 4.15  -  Review of regularity
          
        
        

    Accounting officer's statement
4.13 An accounting officer's statement on regularity, propriety and compliance must be included in the academy trust's annual accounts. This is a declaration by the accounting officer that they have met their responsibilities to Parliament for the resources under their control during the year. It includes responsibility to ensure:

  efficient and effective use of resources (value for money)
  public money is spent for the purposes intended by Parliament (regularity)
  appropriate standards of conduct, behaviour and corporate governance are maintained (propriety)

4.14 The format of the statement is in ESFA's Accounts Direction. The accounting officer also has responsibility to advise the board of trustees and ESFA of instances of irregularity or impropriety, or non-compliance with the funding agreement or handbook.
Auditor's review of regularity
4.15 A review of the accounting officer's statement must be included within the remit of academy trusts' external auditors. The auditor's conclusions on regularity must be addressed jointly to the trust and ESFA.

Find out more about the accounting officer's statement and review of regularity in the Accounts Direction.




      
        
          
            4.16 - 4.17  -  External audit oversight and findings - the audit and risk committee
          
        
        

    4.16 The audit process can support trusts by identifying areas that may require improvement. The board of trustees, taking advice from the audit and risk committee, must ensure there is an appropriate, reasonable and timely response by the trust's management team to findings by external auditors, taking opportunities to strengthen systems of financial management and control.
4.17 Specifically the audit and risk committee must:

  review the external auditor’s plan each year
  review the annual report and accounts
  review the auditor’s findings and actions taken by the trust’s managers in response to those findings
  
    assess the effectiveness and resources of the external auditor to provide a basis for decisions by the trust’s members about the auditor’s reappointment or dismissal or retendering. Considerations may include:

    
      the auditor’s sector expertise
      their understanding of the trust and its activities
      whether the audit process allows issues to be raised on a timely basis at the appropriate level
      the quality of auditor comments and recommendations in relation to key areas
      the personal authority, knowledge and integrity of the audit partners and their staff to interact effectively with, and robustly challenge, the trust’s managers
      the auditor’s use of technology
    
  
  produce an annual report of the committee’s conclusions to advise the board of trustees and members, including recommendations on the reappointment or dismissal or retendering of the external auditor, and their remuneration.





        
  
