“The impact [of climate change] is here. It has been for quite some time. It’s impossible to ignore.”That’s how Tjada D’Oyen McKenna, CEO of Mercy Corps, explained why resilience against climate risk matters so much in this moment. It was a sentiment echoed by the other experts at McKinsey’s COP26 session on the features of adaptation for a changing world. Climate change is here, the panelists agreed, and the world can’t future-protect the planet and communities with mitigation efforts alone. As institutions around the world look at how to accelerate the deployment of resilience and adaptation measures, several guests shared ideas on what it will take to make that happen. Excerpts from their remarks, edited for clarity, are presented below. A replay of today’s session can be found . Please visit our  to register for upcoming sessions. “”
—Tjada D’Oyen McKenna, CEO, Mercy Corps “”
—Jay Koh, managing director and co-founder, The Lightsmith Group “”
—Lauren Sorkin, executive director of the Resilient Cities Network  “”
—Mekala Krishnan, McKinsey partnerMcKinsey analysis finds that regardless of whether warming is limited to 1.5°C or reaches 2.0°C above preindustrial levels by 2050, severe hazard occurrence is likely to increase, and a much larger proportion of the global population could be exposed compared with today.“The importance of nature to solving the climate crisis is well known,” said Robin Smale, a McKinsey partner and director and co-founder of Vivid Economics, based in London. Yet delivering on nature investment faces its own crisis. During McKinsey’s Saturday COP26 session, Robin and a panel of experts discussed the role voluntary carbon markets (VCMs) can play in mobilizing capital for the climate and what it will take to scale investment in nature. He reflects on the session here. McKinsey’s research finds that institutional investors can help accelerate the development of voluntary carbon markets by investing directly and scaling the supply of high-quality compensation and neutralization projects, such as natural climate solutions.Learn more about adaptation and resilience, as well as nature conservation, and how they can play a role on the path to net zero with these McKinsey articles: