







Smart Cities as Large Technological Systems
Overcoming Organizational Challenges in Smart Cities Through Collective ActionPublished in: Sustainable Cities and Society (2021). doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.102730 Posted on RAND.org on January 26, 2021
by Jared Mondschein, Aaron Clark-Ginsberg, Andreas Kuehn
Related Topics: e-Government, Emerging Technologies, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at Science DirectThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








In a race to develop 'smart cities', policymakers in metropolitan regions across the world are rapidly deploying internet of things devices, sensors, and other modern information and communications technologies to solve various governance challenges, increase efficiencies, and empower residents. In this article, we argue that the main challenges policymakers confront in deploying these technologies are organizational rather than technological. To do so we draw on research from science and technology studies on sociotechnical systems and interviews with city government officials to characterize smart cities as large technological systems, which are immense, interconnected systems that consist of not just of technologies but organizational and institutional processes. We then use this analysis to identify challenges and opportunities affecting North American smart city initiatives. We find that disparate—and at times competing—stakeholder motives inhibit the deployment of smart city technologies, including in ways that preserve privacy and security, creating organizational challenges that we argue must be overcome for smart city initiatives to succeed. We conclude by drawing on the perspectives of local policymakers and science and technology studies to offer pathways for local governments to overcome these organizational challenges through collective action and facilitate smart city development.

Access further information on this document at Science DirectThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


Research conducted by

RAND Social and Economic Well-Being



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Elsevier LtdPublisher: Science Direct
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 32
Document Number: EP-68465
Year: 2021
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

E-GovernmentEmerging TechnologiesScience, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




