
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Remote education webinars
  

  
  
  
      
  How to access school-led webinars on remote education to help share good practice.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      25 September 2020
      Last updated
      
        3 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          EdTech Demonstrator webinars

        
        
          New webinars for school leaders

        
        
          New webinars for teachers

        
        
          Case study

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

This guidance is part of remote education practice for schools during coronavirus (COVID-19). The Department for Education (DfE) has been working with schools to develop this series, based on the current experiences and practices of teachers and school leaders.


DfE is offering school-led webinars on good practice in remote education. This is to support schools that are looking to improve their remote provision, in line with the remote education expectations in Statutory obligations and expectations - Get Help with Remote Education.

EdTech Demonstrator webinars

The EdTech Demonstrator programme is a peer-support network of schools and colleges that was launched in April 2020. It offers advice, support and guidance on ways technology can be effectively embedded to support remote teaching during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak and beyond.

Schools and colleges can access existing EdTech webinars from the EdTech Demonstrator website. Or you can sign up for bespoke 1:1 support from a demonstrator school or college.

Schools and colleges new to digital platforms, such as Microsoft Office 365 or G-Suite for Education, are advised to apply for 1:1 support.

New webinars for school leaders

School leaders share what has worked for them in setting up their schools to deliver remote education, with questions from the audience.

These webinars took place live on 30 September and 1 October 2020. You can watch the recordings on the DfE YouTube channel.


  Remote education for primary school leaders - United Learning
  Remote education for secondary school leaders - United Learning


New webinars for teachers

Teachers share what has worked for them when teaching remotely, with questions from the audience. These webinars explore remote teaching strategies and techniques using examples from science lessons (primary) and music and modern foreign languages lessons (secondary).

These webinars took place live on 6 and 8 October 2020. You can watch the recordings on the DfE YouTube channel.


  Remote education for primary school teachers - United Learning
  Remote education for secondary school teachers - United Learning


Case study

You can also read a case study from Ark Schools about their experiences of curriculum sequencing in primary and secondary schools following coronavirus (COVID-19).


The links on this page give you access to webinars on a third party website that have been produced and are managed and provided by the third party. You are licensed to view, download or upload the webinars and share them with members of your own or any associated organisation but you may not reproduce them for commercial purposes.

The DfE is not legally responsible for any loss or damage that may come from any use or misuse of third party websites or resources or any other websites they link to however it arises, except as required by law.






      
        
    Published 25 September 2020
    Last updated 3 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 September 2021
              Added link to Statutory obligations and expectations - Get Help with Remote Education.
            
            
              26 July 2021
              Removed out of date content (details of events that have now passed).
            
            
              18 December 2020
              Added link to case study about curriculum sequencing for primary and secondary.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated 'New webinars for middle leaders' with additional webinar date.
            
            
              25 November 2020
              Added information to 'New webinars for middle leaders'.
            
            
              26 October 2020
              Added links to new webinars for teachers.
            
            
              13 October 2020
              Added links to primary and secondary webinars for school leaders and teachers.
            
            
              1 October 2020
              New dates for webinars for teachers added.
            
            
              25 September 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Curriculum sequencing for primary and secondary

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Teacher training and professional development
        School curriculum and teaching during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    