
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Risley Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Risley is a prison for men in Warrington, Cheshire, including men convicted of a sex offence.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      2 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Risley

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Risley

        
        
          Purple Visits

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Risley

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Risley

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minute survey.


Book and plan your visit to Risley


Risley is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 1 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


Each visitor party will be allocated a time to arrive at the visitor centre. Arrival times are staggered to allow for adequate social distancing. Visitors will be advised as to which sessions they can attend, based on where the prisoner is resident.

Each visitors group will be allowed to enter the prison with cash to the total value of £40.00 where a hot/cold menu will be available.

To visit someone in Risley you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


At least one visitor must be 18 or older at every visit.

There may be a limit to the number of visits a person can have. You can check this with Risley.

Contact Risley if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Risley
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits

Risley is running a limited visits schedule. Visits are also happening differently than normal, observing strict guidelines, which must be followed.

You can book your visit by sending an email to SocialVisitsRisley@justice.gov.uk

You can also book your visit by telephone. There is no online booking service available.

Booking Line: 01925 733284 or 01925 733285

The booking line is open Monday to Friday: 9am to 4pm

Visiting times:


  Monday afternoon - A wing
  Tuesday morning - B wing, F wing & CSU
  Tuesday afternoon - C wing
  Wednesday afternoon - D wing
  Thursday morning - E wing
  Thursday afternoon - G wing


Specific visiting times will be given upon booking. Visitors will be allocated a time to arrive at the Visitors Centre when they book their visit.

How to book legal and professional visits

Booking line: 01925 733284 or 01925 733285

Professional and legal visits can also be booked by sending an email to: LegalVisits.Risley@justice.gov.uk

Visiting times:


  Monday afternoon - A wing
  Tuesday morning - B wing, F wing & CSU
  Tuesday afternoon - C wing
  Wednesday afternoon - D wing
  Thursday morning - E wing
  Thursday afternoon - G wing


Visitors will be allocated a time to arrive at the Visitors Centre when they book their visit.

Getting to Risley
Find Risley on a map

Risley is about 6 miles from Warrington Central and Warrington Bank Quay railway stations. From the stations, use buses going to Leigh or take a taxi.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



There is a visitors car park next to the prison. There are additional spaces for Blue Badge holders next to the visitors centre.

Entering Risley
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors will need to be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Visitors should dress sensibly. You may be turned away if you are wearing items like vests, low-cut tops, high-cut shorts or dresses.

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

You will not be permitted to take anything into the prison with you, except your ID.  Lockers are available in the visitors centre/Enhanced gate search area for all other items.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Risley. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker or with security. This includes pushchairs and car seats.

The rules will be explained by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There are no refreshment facilities available in the visitors centre. There are refreshments available in the Visits Hall, with a limited menu, there is also the opportunity to purchase a “Special Pack” which costs £10, for a prisoner to take back to his wing.

There is a small crèche facilities now available.

Family days
Family days will return later in the year and we are hoping to do one prior to Christmas.

Keep in touch with someone at Risley
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Risley.

Secure video calls

Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Phone calls

In-cell telephony is now available in all cells.

Prisoners can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe. Please note all phone calls are recorded. (except for legal etc.)

Email
You can send emails to someone in Risley using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies from the prisoner, depending on the rules at Risley.

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Risley.

All post apart from legal letters will be opened and checked by officers.

Purple Visits

Purple Visits (a secure video call system) are available at Risley.

Send money and gifts

You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
People in Risley are given a list of approved items that can be sent to them as gifts. Contact Risley for more information on what’s allowed.

We do not accept any parcels that have been sent directly from families. Any exception to this will require an application to be approved by the Head of Operations.

The quickest way for a prisoner to receive clothing etc. is for friends or family to send the prisoner money (ideally not cash), the prisoner can then purchase the items via the approved catalogues.

For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

If HMP Risley receives parcels which have not been approved they will not be issued to the prisoner.

Risley is now allowing underwear and socks through visits again. The process will be:


  
    Visitors must provide underwear and/or socks in an open bag. No more than 4 pairs of socks and 4 items of underwear per visit. The clothing must be new and have the receipt proving they are new items of clothing. The name and number of the prisoner must be clearly written on the bag.
  
  
    The bag will be searched and handed to the visits officer on the desk.
  
  
    All the bags will be taken to reception where they will be X-rayed. Once confirmed clear, an Active drug dog will check all the clothing.
  
  
    Once confirmed clear, the bags will be sealed, and they will be returned to visits. At the end of visits they will be issued to the relevant prisoners.
  
  
    If there is no dog handler on duty, the clothing will be stored in reception until such a time as a dog handler is on duty. Once the dog handler is on duty, reception staff will X-ray the clothing and the dog handler will examine with an Active dog, once confirmed clear the dog handler will seal the bags.
  
  The items will then be distributed to various wings by reception OSGs.
  Clothing will not be accepted on Saturday or Sunday.


It’s important you’re made aware:

If an unauthorised item is found on the clothing or an indication by the drug dog:


  
    The visit will be terminated and the bag will be confiscated as evidence—in some cases the visitor may be arrested and the police called. The visitor may also be banned.
  
  
    If an indication occurs on a different day to the visits i.e. clothing which has been stored in reception until a dog handler is on duty; the bag of clothing will be sealed as evidence and later destroyed, the prisoner will be informed this has occurred. This information will be passed to the police and the visitor may be banned from visits.
  
  
    In all cases in this section an IR will be submitted and placed on the prisoners security file.
  


Clothing like this through visits was allowed in the past however this was abused by a small minority where clothing was laced by illegal narcotics, when this came to light this privilege was removed.

Should we receive any intelligence and/or evidence that this is re-occurring this privilege will again be removed for all prisoners.

 

Life at Risley
Risley is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men can learn new skills to help them on release.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Risley has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by the Warrington Safeguarding Adults Board.

Arrival and first night
When a prisoner first arrives at Risley, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs.

All new prisoners will be required to reverse cohort for the first 14 days at Risley. This means they cannot leave the unit they are on, and cannot have a visit during that time. They will be able to have a shower, have some time in the fresh air and use the phone each day.

Induction

Induction takes place the day after arrival at Risley and lasts about a week. It has been scaled down to allow for social distancing, but the induction programme does allow for new prisoners to receive important information about life at Risley, and they can ask questions about anything they are unsure of.

They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Over 1000 men live at Risley in mostly single rooms.

Risley Prison has a diverse, multi-faith chaplaincy team providing support to prisoners.

Education and work
Prisoners have access to a broad range of vocational training, including interior fitting, painting and decorating, plastering, bricklaying and cleaning. Risley is also part of the Prisons ICT Academy (PICTA) which helps prepare prisoners for work in information and communications technology (ICT) roles.

They can take classroom courses in subjects such as English, maths, art and design and IT. They can also train with the PE department as a gym instructor or take other sports-related qualifications.

Prisoners can work at Risley in contract services workshops as well the kitchens, laundry, gardens and waste management unit. They can also work in the braille workshop which is part of a restorative justice project (where prisoners meet with the victims of crime).

Support for family and friends
Phoenix Futures provide our family services. They can be contacted on 01925 733063 on the days when social visits are running.

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Risley. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

Contact Risley
Governor: Dan Cooper

Telephone: 01925 733 000
Fax: 01925 733 001
Find out about call charges

Address


HMP Risley
Warrington Road
Risley
Warrington
Cheshire
WA3 6BP



See map

Safer custody hotline

If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a prisoner at Risley, call the safer custody hotline.

Telephone: 01925 733007

Find out about call charges

Leave your name, the reason for your call and the name of your loved one and their prisoner number. You will be called back in 24 hours.

In the case of an emergency, please contact 01925 733023 and ask to speak to the Orderly Officer.  This number should only be used if you believe there is an imminent threat to the life of the resident.




      
        
    Published 2 June 2020
    Last updated 29 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 July 2021
              Added link to information about testing for physical contact at visits.
            
            
              18 May 2021
              Additional guidance about new COVID-19 variant in the Bolton and Blackburn areas.
            
            
              30 April 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visit info
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visit info
            
            
              6 November 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new national restrictions in England.
            
            
              24 August 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              6 August 2020
              Updated video call info
            
            
              10 July 2020
              Updated informatin about visiting for friends and family
            
            
              2 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Gartree Prison
        Drake Hall Prison and Young Offender Institution
        Coldingley Prison
        Wetherby Young Offender Institution
        Cookham Wood Young Offender Institution

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    