
      



  
    


      
    Statutory guidance
  

  
  
    Completing the annual Value for Members assessment and Reporting of Net Investment Returns
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance for trustees of relevant occupational defined contribution pension schemes. This guidance is effective from 1 October 2021.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Work and Pensions

      
      Published
      21 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Completing the annual Value for Members assessment and Reporting of Net Investment Returns
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Completing the annual Value for Members assessment and Reporting of Net Investment Returns
    
        PDF, 528KB, 31 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accessible.formats@dwp.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

This guidance is effective from 1 October 2021.


This guidance is for trustees of ‘relevant’ occupational pension schemes regardless of size, who must comply with the requirements to report past investment performance (net returns) in regulation 23(1)(aa) of the Occupational Pension Schemes (Scheme Administration) Regulations 1996 (‘the Administration Regulations).

This guidance is also for trustees of ‘specified schemes’ who are required to carry out the more detailed value for members assessment set out in regulation 25(1A) of the Administration Regulations.

Trustees must have regard to this guidance when complying with their obligations to:

(i) disclose net investment returns under regulation 23(1)(aa) of The Occupational Pension Schemes (Scheme Administration) Regulations 1996 (Administration Regulations);

(ii) carry out the value for members assessment for a specified scheme required by virtue of regulation 25(1A) of the Administration Regulations; and,

(iii) publish information about net investment returns and the results of the value for members assessment, required by regulation 29A of The Occupational and Personal Pension Schemes (Disclosure of Information) Regulations 2013 (Disclosure Regulations); and the amendments made to them by The Occupational Pension Schemes (Administration, Investment, Charges and Governance) (Amendment) Regulations 2021.

We published the consultation response to the following consultations on 21 June 2021:


  Incorporating performance fees within the charge cap
  Improving outcomes for members of defined contribution pension schemes




        
      

      
    Published 21 June 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pension funds and social investment: final response
        Reporting costs, charges and other information: guidance for trustees and managers of occupational pension schemes
        Pension funds and social investment: interim response
        Pension landscape and charging: Quantitative and qualitative research with employers and pension providers (RR804)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Pension scheme administration

  


  

  


    
  


    