
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Digital and telecoms: resources for local authorities
  

  
  
  
      
  This section offers guidance to assist local authorities in areas of digital leadership, legislation, regulation, planning, public assets and deployment.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport

      
      Published
      20 December 2018
      Last updated
      
        8 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Digital strategy and leadership

        
        
          Legislation and regulation

        
        
          Access to public sector assets

        
        
          Guidance for the local planning authority

        
        
          Additional resources

        
        
          5G technologies: radio waves and health

        
        
          Project Gigabit Phase One Delivery Plan

        
        
          Public reviews

        
        
          Gigabit Hubs

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


Digital strategy and leadership

How can local authorities demonstrate leadership and create a strategy to encourage investment in digital infrastructure?

Legislation and regulation

This section provides an overview of the current legislative and regulatory environment around the deployment of digital infrastructure at the local level, including the Electronic Communications Code and the role of Ofcom.

Access to public sector assets

This section presents practical guidance on access matters, including advice on access agreements and how local authorities can promote and encourage the use of public sector land, buildings and other assets for digital deployment.

Guidance for the local planning authority

Local planning authorities have a crucial role in the deployment of fibre and mobile infrastructure. This section offers guidance on how local planning policies and practices can support a wider digital infrastructure strategy.

Additional resources

The guidance below has been developed to address challenges around street works and deployment of digital infrastructure on the Government estate.

The Street Works Toolkit offers guidance for highway authorities and network providers on how effectively to coordinate street works for the deployment of telecommunications infrastructure (this applies to England and Wales).

The Digital Infrastructure Toolkit provides advice for central government and network providers regarding access to government sites. Local authorities are encouraged to consider this guidance and how it might be applied to their sites.

5G technologies: radio waves and health

This section presents information on exposure to radio signals from 5G technologies. This 5G Mobile Technology Guide also provides advice to help councils and local politicians deal with queries from the public, counter misinformation and explain the facts about 5G. Mobile UK, which represents the mobile network operators, provides additional information on its website.

Project Gigabit Phase One Delivery Plan

Project Gigabit

Following constructive and positive feedback to the paper from 96 organisations across the telecoms industry and local government the Project Gigabit Delivery Plan builds on the December 2020 proposals and the responses we have received and sets out our immediate delivery plans.

Public reviews

Building Digital UK will be seeking views from the public and other stakeholders with regard to existing or planned commercial gigabit capable broadband in areas open for public review. All areas currently open for public review can be found on the UK Gigabit Programme: public reviews page. Each public review will take place over a specified time period and will be replicated on the corresponding county council’s broadband web pages.

Gigabit Hubs

There is up to £110 million available to connect public sector buildings - such as GP surgeries, libraries and schools - in hard to reach parts of the UK.

For more information, see GigaHubs: key information.

Homepage: Digital Connectivity Portal





      
        
    Published 20 December 2018
    Last updated 8 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 October 2021
              Added GigaHubs section.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              Added hyperlink to the relevant page on Mobile UK's website for guidance on 5G and health
            
            
              19 March 2021
              Title change
            
            
              19 March 2021
              Added Project Gigabit Delivery Plan section
            
            
              19 February 2021
              Added Public Reviews section
            
            
              27 August 2020
              Updated 5G guidance
            
            
              18 October 2019
              Addition of information on 5G technologies
            
            
              20 December 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Resources for communications network providers
        Digital Connectivity Portal
        UK Gigabit Programme: public reviews

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Local councils and services
        Local government
        Broadband investment
        Communications and telecomms

  


  

  


    
  


    