
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Using authenticators to protect an online service
  

  
  

  
    
  Good Practice Guide (GPG) 44 helps you choose the authenticator that will give you the right level of protection for your service.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Cabinet Office and Government Digital Service

      
      Published
      9 May 2013
      Last updated
      
        14 May 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Using authenticators to protect an online service
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Using authenticators to protect an online service
    
        ODT, 29.7KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance will help you choose the authenticator that will give you the right level of protection for your service. An authenticator could be some information (like a password), a piece of software or a device.

This guidance was written by Government Digital Service (GDS) with help from organisations across the public sector. Key contributors include:


  Companies House
  Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS)
  Department for Work and Pensions (DWP)
  Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA)
  Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO)
  HM Land Registry
  HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC)
  Home Office
  Ministry of Defence (MoD)
  National Crime Agency (NCA)
  National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC)
  NHS
  the Scottish Government


It has been reviewed by organisations from the financial and technology industries, as well as privacy advocates and digital identity experts.



        
      

      
    Published 9 May 2013
    Last updated 14 May 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              14 May 2020
              The guidance has been rewritten in plain English so it's easy for both technical and non-technical users to understand.

The term 'credential' is no longer used in the guidance. This has been replaced by 'authenticator' to avoid any confusion with the term 'verifiable credential'.

Examples of different types of authenticators have been added throughout the guidance.

The annexes from the previous version have been removed and the information from them added to the guidance.

Levels of authentication have been replaced with another way to measure how much protection an authenticator gives a service.
            
            
              3 November 2014
              New version of the guide published.
            
            
              9 May 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Identity assurance: organisation identity
        Identity proofing and authentication
        DWP procurement: security policies and standards
        Transaction monitoring for HMG online service providers
        Requirements for secure delivery of online public services

  




      

    Collection

  


        Identity proofing and authentication

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    