

The UK Ministry of Defence (MOD)'s Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) commissioned RAND Europe to examine different approaches to assessing UK Defence's contribution to national prosperity. The analysis it contains seeks to inform a better understanding of different methodologies that could help the MOD to quantify the value that defence brings to the nation (e.g. in terms of security, influence and prosperity).




Read Online

Understanding the Ministry of Defence's Wider Contribution to UK Prosperity
Measuring Defence Output
by Luke Huxtable, Kate Cox, James Black, Keith Hartley, Ronald E. Smith, Matthew Uttley, Benedict Wilkinson, Charlene Rohr, Hui Lu
Related Topics: Decisionmaking, Homeland Security, Military Doctrine, Operational Readiness, United Kingdom
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


1 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










Research Questions

What different methodologies could be used for measuring or estimating the primary economic benefits of defence?Which methods are most appropriate (i.e. relevant, feasible) and should therefore be investigated as a matter of priority?How transferrable is each of the methodologies to the defence context?What are the barriers to, and opportunities of, applying each approach in the defence context?What could a defence-related equivalent of each approach entail, and how would this methodology work in practice?What are the possible applications of each approach for defence decision-making, and what areas for further research or refinement can be identified?



Despite the growing policy emphasis on understanding the value of UK defence, assessing the primary benefits of defence remains a challenge. Defence is inherently complex, and it remains difficult to prove that the non-occurrence of an event (e.g. a conflict) is directly related to the existence of defence capabilities and activities. Linked to these challenges, connecting defence activity and output to defence outcomes and benefits remains elusive.
This study has explored the potential of five methodologies (lines of enquiry — LOEs) to measure the contribution of defence to UK prosperity in terms of its primary benefits (i.e. protection from external threats). These are:

LOE1 — defence analogue to Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs)
LOE2 — Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) measures;
LOE3 — insurance policy techniques;
LOE4 — logic models and proxy indicators; and
LOE5 — discrete choice experiments (DCEs).

This study has identified a range of insights for the Ministry of Defence on how to apply and further develop these methodologies towards measuring the primary benefits of defence. This study has been exploratory, and it was expected that not all approaches would be viable.
Key Findings

Based on the research into the five individual LOEs, it is apparent that whilst none offer a comprehensive solution in their own right, PALYs (LOE1), VSL (LOE2), logic models and proxy indicators (LOE4) and DCEs (LOE5) each offer opportunities that could pave the way for an improved understanding of defence's contribution to prosperity.
Insurance techniques (LOE3) cannot measure primary benefits, but could support defence decision-making by helping to conceptualise, manage and 'price' defence risks.


Recommendations

The MOD should consider taking forward the research from this study in the following ways:Develop an improved understanding of how defence contributes to national prosperity, by further developing and refining the defence logic model (LOE4).
Improve the understanding and quantification of public perceptions of defence, its benefits and opportunity costs through the use of a DCE (LOE5).
Consider the development of new approaches to quantify (and possibly monetise) the benefits of defence, especially through PALYs (LOE1) and VSL (LOE2).
Employ proxy concepts for assessing the benefits of defence where actual measures of benefit cannot be identified or developed (see specific suggestions under LOE4).
Engage with insurance industries to identify which techniques might help to improve the MOD's management, modelling and pricing of defence risk.
Apply each assessment framework to a particular area, such as a specific mission-type, to test the application of multiple methods to a specific question of quantifying primary benefits of defence.



 Related Products 








Project
Understanding the contribution of defence to UK prosperity

Jul 14, 2021






Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction

Chapter Two
Identification of candidate methods

Chapter Three
Deep dive into potential approaches

Chapter Four
Assessment framework for defence

Chapter Five
Conclusions and implications for defence

Annex A
Definitions

Annex B
A potential logic model for UK defence




Research conducted by

RAND Europe



The research described in this report was commissioned by the UK Ministry of Defence (MOD)'s Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) and conducted by RAND Europe.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Europe Community Interest CompanyPublisher: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 65
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA638-1
Document Number: RR-A638-1
Year: 2021
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

DecisionmakingHomeland SecurityMilitary DoctrineOperational ReadinessUnited Kingdom

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Huxtable, Luke, Kate Cox, James Black, Keith Hartley, Ronald E. Smith, Matthew Uttley, Benedict Wilkinson, Charlene Rohr, and Hui Lu, Understanding the Ministry of Defence's Wider Contribution to UK Prosperity: Measuring Defence Output. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA638-1.html.
Huxtable, Luke, Kate Cox, James Black, Keith Hartley, Ronald E. Smith, Matthew Uttley, Benedict Wilkinson, Charlene Rohr, and Hui Lu, Understanding the Ministry of Defence's Wider Contribution to UK Prosperity: Measuring Defence Output, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A638-1, 2021. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA638-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



