
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition
  

  
  

  
    
  The Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition aims to provide funding for projects that can help develop a wide range of innovative low-carbon hydrogen supply solutions. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      24 May 2021
      Last updated
      
        1 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2: guidance notes (Stream 1) - closed to applications
    
        PDF, 1.07MB, 118 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2: guidance notes (Stream 2) - closed to applications
    
        PDF, 1.08MB, 122 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2: stakeholder engagement day presentation
    
        PDF, 1.45MB, 40 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition: stakeholder engagement day questions and answers
    
        PDF, 235KB, 13 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition: guidance notes questions and answers
    
        PDF, 179KB, 11 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

Update 31 August 2021

Stream 1 Phase 1 and Stream 2 are closed to applications.


The Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition aims to support innovation in the supply of hydrogen, reducing the costs of supplying hydrogen, bringing new solutions to the market, and ensuring that the UK continues to develop world leading hydrogen technologies for a future hydrogen economy. It follows on from the first Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply Competition. The competition forms part of the Net Zero Innovation Portfolio (NZIP).

Up to £60 million will be competitively awarded to projects that can help develop a wide range of innovative low-carbon hydrogen supply solutions.

The competition will be delivered via 2 streams.

Stream 1

Stream 1 is expected to run over 2 phases.

Phase 1 will support the development of feasibility studies with technology readiness levels between 4 and 6, valued at up to £300,000 per project.

Phase 2 will down select projects from Phase 1 and support demonstrations at up to £6 million per project.


Stream 1 Phase 1 is now closed to applications.


Stream 2

Stream 2 will support demonstration of projects that are closer to market with technology readiness levels between 6 and 7. This could support projects with up to £10 million per project to demonstrate the hydrogen supply opportunities.


Stream 2 is now closed to applications.


A virtual Stakeholder Engagement Day was held on 8 June 2021 to provide an opportunity to understand more about the competition and to ask questions. We have published the slide pack and questions and answers from the session here.



        
      

      
    Published 24 May 2021
    Last updated 1 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 September 2021
              Stream 2 is closed to applications.
            
            
              9 August 2021
              Stream 1 Phase 1 is now closed to applications. Stream 2 remains open for registration and applications.
            
            
              21 July 2021
              We have published a new Q&A document. We have also updated both guidance notes documents.
            
            
              25 June 2021
              Stream 1 Phase 1 and Stream 2 of the Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition are now open for applications.
            
            
              22 June 2021
              We have published guidance documents for Stream 1 and Stream 2 and a Stakeholder Engagement Day questions and answers document to provide more information about the competition.
            
            
              16 June 2021
              Stakeholder engagement pack added.
            
            
              24 May 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply Competition (closed)
        Carbon Capture, Usage and Storage (CCUS) Innovation 2.0 competition: guidance and how to apply
        Industrial Fuel Switching competition
        Direct Air Capture and other Greenhouse Gas Removal technologies competition
        Register your interest for Phase 3 of the Industrial Energy Efficiency Accelerator

  




      

    Collection

  


        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Funding programmes

  


  

  


    
  


    