

Environmental Sustainability
Using evidence-based analysis to support decisionmakers working to ensure environmental sustainability and navigate the socio-economic implications of a changing climate.


Contacts



Susan Guthrie
Research Group Director, Science and Emerging Technology, RAND Europe






/content/rand/randeurope/research/science-technology-innovation/environmental-sustainability-and-climate-change/jcr:content/par/wrapperdiv_156735908/wrapperdiv_885432439/teaserlist_0

Research, commentary, and events

ProjectTackling societal challenges and guiding the future of research and innovation in Norway09 Aug 2021
Researchers identified 20 priority missions and 10 structural measures that could help the Research Council of Norway to develop a strong and resilient research and innovation environment in the strategic areas of oceans, green transition, health and welfare, cohesion and globalisation, and technology and digitalisation.


ProjectDecarbonising UK transport15 Jul 2021
A series of seven roadmaps for decarbonising domestic transport in the UK informed the UK Government’s 2021 Transport Decarbonisation Plan. These roadmaps address: cars and light goods vehicles; buses; coaches; heavy goods vehicles; rail; domestic shipping; and domestic aviation


MultimediaCrisis Response in a Changing Climate04 Jun 2021
In this audio conversation, senior analyst Lucia Retter is joined by Lieutenant General Richard Nugee, the nonexecutive director for climate change and sustainability for UK Defence, to discuss a study on the implications of climate change for UK defence logistics in crisis response situations.


ProjectAssessing the consistency of UK climate risk approaches with new ISO guidelines28 May 2021
Research for the UK Climate Resilience Programme aims to help organisations in the UK determine which guidance documents are most appropriate for their purposes and whether existing documents might be updated to reduce inconsistencies with ISO guidelines and strengthen weaknesses.


ProjectDeveloping future scenarios for the sustainable use of pesticides 12 May 2021
To help the EU formulate an appropriate policy trajectory to accomplish its ambitious pesticide reduction targets, researchers are conducting a foresight study for the sustainable use of pesticides in relation to promoting sustainable food systems and protecting health and the environment.


ProjectCrisis response in a changing climate04 May 2021
Researchers identified climate change challenges likely to emerge and propose five concrete policy actions that the UK Ministry of Defence could take to mitigate the impact of climate change on crisis response situations.


ProjectIdentifying patterns and factors affecting adoption of electric vehicles across the UK01 Mar 2021
Researchers examined patterns of electric vehicles adoption across the country to help locate areas where investment in electric repair and servicing skills is needed.


ProjectConsumer behaviours and attitudes to food in the UK26 Jun 2020
The way people buy food is changing, and the sales of ethical and sustainable produce have increased. Eating food from outside the home is increasingly common, and what people consume still falls short of dietary guidelines. The reasons vary, and several policy levers may exist to influence people's food choices. 


ProjectImplications of climate change for UK defence and security17 Jun 2020
Looking to 2035, the Ministry of Defence could play a key role in developing robust policy and programming on climate change. Researchers identified six high-level recommendations to support the MOD in developing an approach to address climate-related issues.


ProjectUsing foresight to examine the global food system18 Nov 2019
Based on a series of foresight exercises for the UK Food Standards Agency (FSA), researchers developed a global food systems map, a map of systemic interdependencies, and a framework for future action to help the FSA achieve its goals.


ProjectTechnology's potential to tackle climate change in global agri-food systems06 Nov 2019
A pilot study identified trends, opportunities and constraints in the use of emerging technologies to address climate-related challenges within the agri-food system. The findings will help to inform and test the potential for future research on the topic.


ProjectAgricultural ammonia emissions carry steep costs17 Sep 2018
Ammonia emissions in the UK have been rising since 2013, largely due to agricultural waste and fertiliser runoff. By 2020 the impacts on biodiversity, ecosystems, and human health may total over £700 million per year. 


ProjectMapping Smart Cities in the EU25 Mar 2014
The European Parliament asked RAND Europe to provide background information and advice to their members on the role of Smart Cities initiatives and to explain how existing mechanisms perform. The researchers established a working definition of a Smart City and mapped the cities fitting this definition across the member states.




