
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Crown exemption for controlled military list equipment and technology owned by the UK MOD
  

  
  
  
      
  Exemptions from export and trade control licences for controlled military goods owned by the Crown.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence, Department for International Trade, and Export Control Joint Unit

      
      Published
      10 September 2012
      Last updated
      
        19 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Crown exemption

        
        
          Official letter granting crown exemption

        
        
          When crown exemption does not apply

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

This guidance provides a brief overview about Crown exemption in respect of the transfers of export-controlled military list goods, technology or software owned by the UK Ministry of Defence (MOD). It applies to exporters engaged by the MOD, including UK armed forces, to export on their behalf military list goods, technology or software.

Other government departments have their own arrangements for Crown exemption.

Crown exemption does not apply to the transfer from the United Kingdom of any goods, technology or software controlled under the EU dual use regulation.

Crown exemption does not apply to the transfer from the United Kingdom of any goods, technology or software owned privately by commercial entities.

Crown exemption

The UK Crown is not bound by the provisions of the Export Control Act 2002 for goods specified by schedule 2 of the Export Control Order 2008 (ie the UK military list which forms part of the UK Strategic Export Control Lists).

Official letter granting crown exemption

Where the Crown owns the controlled military goods, technology or software being exported, and has similar rights over disposal, then an exporter acting on the Crown’s behalf may carry out the export without a licence. This Crown Exemption for MOD UK/UK Armed Forces-owned goods, technology or software is subject to the issuing of an approval letter by the MOD team in the Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU).

Contact details:



Export Control Joint Unit - Ministry of Defence team
2nd floor
Department for International Trade
3 Whitehall Place 
London, SW1A 2AW  



Telephone: 020 7218 9821
Email: ECJU-MODTeam@mod.uk

Only approval letters issued by the MOD team in the ECJU constitute formal approval to export military goods, technology or software on behalf of the MOD under Crown exemption. Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (HMRC) formally recognise these letters as authorisation of Crown exemption.

Letters of approval issued by any other MOD entity than the MOD team in ECJU are not valid and will constitute non-compliance.

When crown exemption does not apply

Crown exemption does not apply if the goods are owned privately. In this case an export or trade control licence will be required if the goods, technology or software are subject to control by the Department for International Trade (DIT) Export Control Organisation.

Goods are generally controlled either because they are listed on the UK Strategic Export Control Lists or as a result of end use controls.


You can apply for an export licence using SPIRE.


Goods vested in the Crown under a contract with the Ministry of Defence do not automatically have Crown exemption status unless ownership of the goods formally passes to the Ministry of Defence. If in doubt, please contact the MOD team in ECJU.

Further information


  
MOD team in the ECJU: telephone 020 7218 9821, email: ECJU-MODTeam@mod.gov.uk

  DIT ECO Helpline: telephone 020 7215 4594, email: exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk







      
        
    Published 10 September 2012
    Last updated 19 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 March 2021
              Export Control and MoD contact email addresses updated.
            
            
              3 August 2017
              Updated contact details for the team that issues Crown exemption letters.
            
            
              18 April 2013
              Updated contact details for ACP to include an email address.
            
            
              6 March 2013
              Changed content from Crown Immunity to Crown exemptions
            
            
              12 February 2013
              Removed information on Open General Export Licences
            
            
              12 December 2012
              Amended broken links and added related guides
            
            
              10 September 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Brokering (trade) of dual-use items
        Chemical Weapons Convention guidance
        Supplementary Weapons of Mass Destruction End-Use controls

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        UK Strategic Export Control Lists

  




      

    Collection

  


        Import and export controls

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    