
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    National standard for driver and rider training
  

  
  

  
    
  What you must be able to do and what you must know and understand to provide training to drivers and riders.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency

      
      Published
      31 October 2011
      Last updated
      
        20 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    National standard for driver and rider training
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    National standard for driver and rider training
    
        
          Ref: DVSA/NS/DRT
        
        PDF, 597KB, 33 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email gov.uk.publishing@dvsa.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The standard is for people who provide training to drivers of cars, light vans, and mopeds and motorcycles.

It tells you what you must be able to do to provide training.

Contact the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) if you have:


  questions about the standard
  ideas about how it could be improved
  evidence to make the standard stronger



    DVSA national driver and rider standards


    
        
          Email national.standards@dvsa.gov.uk
        


    







        
      

      
    Published 31 October 2011
    Last updated 20 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 November 2020
              Added HTML version of National Standard for driver and rider training.
            
            
              24 November 2014
              Added information about the increased considerations that need to be taken when driving in bad weather, using sat nav systems, responsibilities of accompanying drivers, and updated references of ‘Driving Standards Agency’ to ‘Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency’.
            
            
              23 December 2013
              Added a webpage version of the 'National standard for driver and rider training'.
            
            
              31 October 2011
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  

      
    
      Part of
          
            Become a car driving instructor: step by step
          
        
  


      
    
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 1:
                  
                
              

              
                Check if you can become an instructor
              
          

          
              
Check you're eligible to become a driving instructor 
Read about driving instructor responsibilities 
You are currently viewing: Find out about the skills and knowledge you need 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 2:
                  
                
              

              
                Apply to become a driving instructor
              
          

          
              You must get a new Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) check to start your application, even if you already have one.

              
Get a DBS check £8.22
Start your application 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 3:
                  
                
              

              
                Get a trainer
              
          

          
              Get a registered trainer to help you prepare for the 3 qualifying tests.

              Find driving instructor training courses 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 4:
                  
                
              

              
                Take the theory test (ADI part 1)
              
          

          
              
Revise and practise for your test 
What you need for your test 
Find a theory test centre 
Book your test £81


              Once you've passed the theory test, you must pass the other parts of the test within 2 years or you'll have to start the whole process again.

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 5:
                  
                
              

              
                Take the driving ability test (ADI part 2)
              
          

          
              
What happens during the test 
What you need for your test 
Find a driving test centre 
Book your test £111


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 6:
                  
                
              

              
                Get practice teaching
              
          

          
              If you’ve passed ADI part 2 you have the option to apply for a 6 month trainee licence to get experience teaching students. 

              
Find out about trainee instructor licences 
Apply for a trainee instructor licence £140


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 7:
                  
                
              

              
                Take the instructional ability test (ADI part 3)
              
          

          
              
What happens during the test 
What you need for your test 
Find a driving test centre 
Book your test £111


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 8:
                  
                
              

              
                Register and start working as an instructor 
              
          

          
              Once you've passed the tests you must register within 12 months.

              Register for your first ADI certificate £300

              When you have your certificate you can start charging for lessons. You can either:

              
join a driving school
set up your own business 


              You'll have at least one standards check every 4 years. You also need to renew your registration and get a new DBS check every 4 years. 

              
Find out about ADI standards checks 
Renew your registration £300
Improve your skills as an instructor 


          

        
    
  












    