As banks pursue digital adoption to improve efficiency and customer experience, they must navigate evolving customer preferences for different channels for different needs. In some cases, customers embrace new technologies for their convenience. In other cases, they cling to old ways of doing business out of habit or simple resistance to change. According to McKinsey’s latest Retail Banking Consumer Survey of 45,000 consumers in 20 countries, these cross-currents are forcing rapid changes in the way banks connect and cultivate relationships with their customers.We found that the digital channel is increasingly important, even in countries that have been slower to adopt digital. In Italy, for example, more than two-thirds of customers now use digital channels. Meanwhile, in countries where digitization has advanced more swiftly, more than 85 percent use them (Exhibit 1). As a consequence of higher digital adoption, customers are visiting branches less in every county we surveyed. In Germany, for example, the percentage of people visiting a branch once a month declined from 60 percent in 2012 to 31 percent in 2018, while in Sweden it dropped from 27 percent to 8 percent. Overall, customers are more and more likely to use digital channels and reserve their branch visits for special advice, to solve complicated issues, or to purchase complex products such as mortgages.But while branch traffic is down across the board, digital does not dominate all banking  (Exhibit 2). The . Besides being a place people can go to interact face to face on complex issues, having a nearby branch is one the major factors customers consider when choosing a bank. In 2018, according to McKinsey analysis, 91 percent of new bank customers in Western Europe came through the branch, while in North America that number was 77 percent.The bank-channel story would be relatively straightforward if customers simply preferred digital channels for daily, routine transactions and the branch for account openings and the occasional complex product or service. But the reality is more nuanced. Customers are increasing channel agnostic, jumping between channels to solve problems and get answers. They are also embracing digital channels . A prime example of this evolving behavior is the increasing use of remote advisory over the phone and internet when supported by professional relationship managers (RMs). While these trends are broadly true across the regions we surveyed, different countries are at different stages of digital adoption—even in Western Europe—and so the on-the-ground realities will vary. The Nordic countries, for example, tend to have the most advanced digital offerings, while some of the countries in Southern Europe still rely on extensive branch networks. But there is room for improvement everywhere when it comes to running channels efficiently and delivering excellent customer experience. We see four actions banks can take to better orchestrate their channel interplay and create a next-generation distribution model for customers:We expect the trends identified in this year’s survey to continue. Consumers will embrace digital and hybrid channels while visits to the branch will further decline. What will set banks apart is their ability to optimize these channels and aggressively vie with a wide array of traditional and nontraditional competitors.