
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Bovine TB in Great Britain statistics user survey 2020
  

  
  

  
    
  Seeking views on how we can improve our  Bovine TB statistics.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs

      
      Published
      17 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        29 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Guidance - further information about the Bovine TB in Great Britain statistics user survey questions
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
We are seeking your views on how we can improve the Bovine TB statistics we produce. In particular, we are interested in:


  introducing county level herd incidence using herd years at risk
  the frequency of publishing the statistics
  presentation of statistics at different geographical groups
  
interactive dashboard to visualise the bTB datasets


Why we are running the survey

Our statistics publications follow the Code of Practice for Statistics. The code requires us to regularly engage with users and them how our statistics could be improved.

The survey will help us to:


  find out how the statistics are used
  find out if the statistics are fit for purpose
  seek feedback on possible changes
  provide an opportunity to suggest innovations


About the survey

The survey includes questions on statistical content, frequency of publication, geographic groupings, data presentation and user accessibility.  More detailed information about the survey questions is provided in the attached guidance note.

How to take part

The survey was open until 31 July 2020.

A summary of the survey results was published in autumn 2020.

Related series


  Latest official statistics on tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain - monthly
  Latest national statistics on tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain - quarterly
  interactive dashboard


For further information you can contact: tbstatistics@defra.gov.uk

Twitter: @DefraStats




        
      

      
    Published 17 June 2020
    Last updated 29 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              29 January 2021
              Updated with a link to a summary of the survey results.
            
            
              3 July 2020
              Replaced guidance note document and amended text on landing page to improve instruction.
            
            
              26 June 2020
              Edited details on web page, added link to interactive dashboard and also informed users that the interactive dashboard is temporarily only available through Internet Explorer.
            
            
              17 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Historical statistics notices on the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain, 2020 - monthly
        Historical statistics notices on the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain, 2020 - quarterly
        Historical statistics notices on the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain, 2017
        Statistics on TB in Non-Bovine Species
        Historical statistics notices on the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in cattle in Great Britain, 2019 - monthly

  




      

    Collection

  


        Bovine TB statistics

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Food and farming
        Animal and plant health

  


  

  


    
  


    