
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Advanced Modular Reactor (AMR) Feasibility and Development Project
  

  
  

  
    
  Details of the 2-phase Advanced Modular Reactor Feasibility and Development Project.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      5 September 2018
      Last updated
      
        10 July 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Advanced Modular Reactor competition: phase 2 development - project descriptions
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Advanced Modular Reactor competition: phase 1 feasibility - project descriptions
    
        PDF, 184KB, 13 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
BEIS is investing up to £44 million in the Advanced Modular Reactor (AMR) feasibility and development (F&D) project. Advanced Modular Reactor (AMRs), here defined as a broad group of advanced nuclear reactors, differ from conventional reactors, which use pressurised or boiling water for primary cooling. They aim to maximise the amount of off-site factory fabrication and can target:


  generating low cost electricity
  increased flexibility in delivering electricity to the grid
  increased functionality, such as the provision of heat output for domestic or industrial purposes, or facilitating the production of hydrogen
  alternative applications that may generate additional revenue or economic growth


Phase 1

Phase 1 provided funding of up to £4 million to undertake a series of feasibility studies for AMR designs, with contracts worth up to £300,000.

The following 8 organisations were awarded contracts to produce feasibility studies as part of phase 1 of the AMR F&D project:


  Advanced Reactor Concepts LLC
  DBD Limited
  Blykalla Reaktorer Stockholm AB (LeadCold)
  Moltex Energy Limited
  Tokamak Energy Ltd
  U-Battery Developments Ltd
  Ultra Safe Nuclear Corporation
  Westinghouse Electric Company UK


Each organisation provided an abstract summarising their proposal (the claims and opinions expressed in the abstracts are those of the applicant organisation and don’t necessarily reflect the official policy or position of BEIS).

Phase 2

Subject to phase 1 demonstrating clear value for money and government approval, a share of up to £40 million was available for selected projects from phase 1 to undertake development activities. A possible further £5 million was also made available to regulators to support this.

The 3 successful projects for Phase 2 were:


  Tokamak Energy
  Westinghouse
  U-Battery


Attached is a brief description of each project.




        
      

      
    Published 5 September 2018
    Last updated 10 July 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 July 2020
              Advanced Modular Reactor (AMR) Phase 2 projects announced.
            
            
              5 September 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Advanced modular reactors (AMRs): technical assessment
        Funding for nuclear innovation
        Nuclear innovation programme: advanced manufacturing and materials competition, Phase 2 - successful projects
        Proposed acquisition of Impcross Ltd by Gardner Aerospace: undertakings accepted
        Nuclear innovation programme: advanced manufacturing and materials competition, Phase 2 (closed)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon technologies

  


  

  


    
  


    