
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Call for Ad Hominem members: UK Space Agency Earth Observation Advisory Committee
  

  
  

  
    
  This is a call for ad hominem members for the UK Space Agency Earth Observation Advisory Committee. The deadline for applications is 15 June 2020.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Space Agency

      
      Published
      21 May 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Annex A - Call for Ad Hominem members:  UK Space Agency EOAC
    
        ODT, 24.7KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email info@ukspaceagency.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Earth Observation Advisory Committee (EOAC) advises the UK Space Agency on strategic, scientific, technological and data exploitation issues. The aim is to provide advice to the Agency on the strategic direction for the UK’s involvement in Satellite Earth Observation and Climate programmes and projects.

The EOAC is made up of ex officio members representing key stakeholders across government, academia, and trade representative bodies. Ad hominem members are drawn from across the sector to add breadth and depth to the composition of the committee.

The UK Space Agency is seeking to recruit up to 3 new ad hominem members. Ad hominem members provide an independent view using their own experience. Existing ad hominem membership is being extended for 2 years in line with the current Terms of Reference (Annex A) to provide continuity alongside newly appointed members.

Successful applicants will operate in a personal capacity and will be encouraged to have the freedom to challenge, debate and provide alternative views. This requires ad hominem members to approach the role with neutrality rather than as a direct advocate of either their employer or their part of the sector.

Position Specification

Applicants should have a genuine desire and ability to assist the UK Space Agency: set, measure, and achieve strategic goals for all aspects of our satellite earth observation and climate work. The successful candidates will complement the ex officio members of the Committee by bringing specific expertise or experience in one or more of the following areas:


  science and technology
  small and large industry
  space and ground segment infrastructure
  applications for both commercial and non-commercial markets
  communications and outreach
  education and skills
  international space sector


The appointments will be initially for 3 years from July 2020 to July 2023 with the possibility of an extension up to a maximum of 5 years.

These are unpaid roles but include reasonable travel and subsistence expenses for attendance at meetings in accordance with UK Space Agency terms and conditions. The time commitment is variable: EOAC meetings are likely to be a whole day, twice per year but the post holders will also be expected to provide guidance and advice at other times over the year up to an inclusive maximum of 6 days in total.

Meetings are usually held in Swindon, London or Harwell. Due to the current circumstances during the COVID-19 restrictions, any involvement in the coming months will be flexible to the changed working circumstances we are all under. This will include, where necessary, holding remote meetings via videoconference.

Selection procedure

The UK Space Agency endeavours to appoint the best members possible for its advisory bodies while also seeking to ensure that advisory bodies reflect the diversity within the relevant communities and we therefore encourage applications to ensure we are fully inclusive in terms of equality with regard to gender, race and disability. We welcome applications from people at all stages of their career.

Applications should include a covering letter (of no more than one page) and CV (of no more than 2 pages).

The covering letter should include:


  your motivation for serving on the EOAC committee
  your area(s) of expertise and current activity
  your level of seniority and what you would bring to the EOAC
  appropriate qualities including knowledge of the subject area
  any possible conflicts of interest or steps you will take to ensure a neutral position
  experience (if any) of serving on committees, particularly where neutrality is required
  a statement of availability – i.e. can your current employer release you for up to 6 days per year?


If you believe you have the skills, experience, or ideas useful to the EOAC please send your application to UKSAEOT@ukspaceagency.gov.uk by 9am on Monday 15 June 2020.

Please mark the email as CONFIDENTIAL EOAC Application: Your surname

We anticipate notifying applicants of the outcome by the end of June 2020. Should we receive an especially high level of interest, we will conduct informal telephone interviews prior to selection. Where we do not receive interest from suitably qualified/experienced candidates we will not appoint.

The next EOAC meeting is scheduled to take place on Thursday 2 July, 2pm to 4pm, via videoconference. Applicants are encouraged to hold this time where possible, but availability will not be considered during the assessment of applications.

For further information please contact UKSAEOT@ukspaceagency.gov.uk

Data Protection Information

By applying for this role, you consent to your personal information being used for the purposes of this recruitment exercise. Any information provided will be used only for this purpose, will be stored securely, and will not be shared with any external parties. We will delete the personal information of all unsuccessful applicants no later than three months from the completion of the recruitment exercise.



        
      

      
    Published 21 May 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Hong Kong: translators and interpreters
        Government response to the Lower Thames Crossing consultation
        Consultation on options for a new Lower Thames Crossing
        Lower Thames Crossing

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Science and innovation

  


  

  


    
  


    