Washington D.C. – The Finals of the Department of Energy (DOE) National Science Bowl, that were to take place in early May in Washington, D.C., have moved to a virtual competition. The winners of regional events held earlier this year across the country – 61 high school teams – have been engaged in an academic competition that will culminate in the crowning of the new National Champion on June 6, 2020.“I am excited and proud to announce the first-ever virtual National Science Bowl® Finals,” said DOE’s Office of Science Director, Dr. Chris Fall. “This challenging and competitive event calls on the most practiced and brightest students to showcase their skills in an array of areas. We will call on these students in future years to be the innovators and leaders that drive science.”During the academic competition, in which all 61 teams competed virtually over the past few weeks, teams of high school students participated in a fast-paced question-and-answer competition, being tested on a range of science disciplines including biology, chemistry, Earth science, physics, energy and math. The top 32 teams will now compete for the National Championship on Saturday, June 6. The field will be narrowed by the top scores in each consecutive round and the winning team will be announced that night. The teams’ performances in the academic rounds of competition will be the primary determinant of their standings.The top two teams will receive $2,500 to take back to their schools to support their science activities.The top 4 teams will receive $2,000, the top 8 teams will receive $1,500, and the top 16 teams will take home $1,000 for their schools’ science departments.Approximately 325,000 students have participated in the National Science Bowl since DOE created it in 1991. DOE’s Office of Science manages the National Science Bowl and sponsors the Finals competition.For more information about the National Science Bowl, please go to . After a preliminary elimination round, these high school teams are competing June 6:BASIS Chandler (High School), Chandler, Ariz.Clovis North High School, Fresno, Calif.Dougherty Valley High School, San Ramon, Calif.Mira Loma High School, Sacramento, Calif.North Hollywood High School, North Hollywood, Calif.The Harker School (High School), San Jose, Calif.University High School, Irvine, Calif.Newtown High School, Sandy Hook, Conn.Eastside High School, Gainesville, Fla.The Westminster Schools (High School), Atlanta, Ga.Naperville North High School, Naperville, Ill.Carmel High School, Carmel, IndianaAmes High School, Ames, IowaThe Gatton Academy of Mathematics and Science (High School), Bowling Green, Ky.Montgomery Blair High School, Silver Spring, Maryland                          Lexington High School, Lexington, Mass.Huron High School, Ann Arbor, Mich.Wayzata High School, Plymouth, Minn.Oxford High School, Oxford, Miss.Ladue Horton Watkins High School, St. Louis, MissouriThe Davidson Academy (High School), Reno, Nev.Ridge High School, Basking Ridge, N.J.Shaker High School, Latham, N.Y.North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics, Durham, N.C.Westview High School, Portland, Ore.North Allegheny Senior High School, Wexford, Pa.Dulles High School, Sugar Land, TexasLubbock High School, Lubbock, TexasThomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology, Alexandria, Va.Pullman High School, Pullman, Wash.Tesla STEM High School, Redmond, Wash.Morgantown High School, Morgantown, W.Va.