

The U.S. Air Force (USAF) today stands at a crossroads over its launch acquisition strategy. In this report, authors analyze the heavy lift launch market to help the USAF gain clearer insight into the number of U.S. launch service providers that the global heavy lift launch market can support and the impact of near-term decisions on the USAF's ability to (1) meet NSS launch demand using U.S. providers and (2) sustain two or more U.S. providers.




Read Online

Assessing the Impact of U.S. Air Force National Security Space Launch Acquisition Decisions
An Independent Analysis of the Global Heavy Lift Launch Market
by Bonnie L. Triezenberg, Colby P. Steiner, Grant Johnson, Jonathan Cham, Eder Sousa, Moon Kim, Mary Kate Adgie
Related Topics: Markets, Military Acquisition and Procurement, Space Science and Technology, United States Air Force
CitationEmbedView related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






DownloadDownload eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


3.5 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.




Purchase
Purchase Print Copy

 FormatList Price
Price


Add to Cart
Paperback144 pages
$38.00
$30.40 20% Web Discount










Research Questions

How many U.S. launch service providers can the global heavy lift launch market support?What are the effects of near-term acquisition decisions on the USAF's ability to (1) meet NSS launch demand using U.S. launch service providers and (2) sustain two or more U.S. launch service providers over the next ten years?



In 2019, the U.S. Air Force (USAF) asked the RAND Corporation to independently analyze the heavy lift space launch market to assess how potential USAF decisions in the near term could affect domestic launch providers and the market in general. This report's authors examined historical and projected levels of demand and supply in the global commercial and National Security Space (NSS) launch markets to help the USAF gain clearer insight into the number of U.S. launch service providers that the global heavy lift launch market can support and the impact of near-term acquisition decisions on the USAF's ability to (1) meet NSS launch demand using U.S. launch service providers and (2) sustain two or more U.S. launch service providers over the next decade.
Using literature reviews, historical launch data, and interviews with subject-matter experts and industry stakeholders, the authors developed launch market forecasts and constructed vignettes to illuminate potential market strategies for U.S. firms.
As a result, the USAF should continue to provide tailored support for three U.S. launch service providers in the heavy lift launch market. Longer term, it should prepare for a future with only two U.S. providers of NSS-certified heavy lift launch services.
Key Findings

The global addressable market (the share for which commercial firms compete) will likely grow only moderately over the next decadeThe annual number of launches worldwide grew to 71 in 2018 from 47 in 1998, but the commercial portion over which launch firms compete—addressable share—stayed steady at around 20 launches; today, the addressable share represents only 35 percent of the total market.
SpaceX's Falcon 9 handles more than half of addressable launches today, with communications companies being the dominant customers.
This market is likely to see only moderate growth over the next ten years, and the U.S. share of this market is likely to fall. The net result is that the addressable share of the launch market is unlikely to support more than one U.S. supplier of launch services focused on commercial heavy lift.
The National Security Space market is likely to face a near term supply shortageIn many conceivable futures, the USAF's current acquisition plan is unlikely to provide sufficient supply of NSS launch vehicles certified to carry U.S. NSS payloads.
The USAF can lower the risk of insufficient supply of NSS launch vehicles by gaining nonpriority access to legacy launch systems and/or by supporting three launch services providers through the 2022–2025 time frame.


Recommendations

For USAF near-term strategy, continue to provide tailored support through 2023 to enable three U.S. launch service providers to enter and/or continue in the heavy lift launch market.
Such a strategy may increase the probability of global supplier consolidation but decrease the probability of additional foreign competition.
Provide time for U.S. firms to best position themselves in the launch markets.
Allow market forces to determine which firms are strongest, and thus survive, and which exit.
For USAF longer-term strategy, make prudent preparations for a future with only two U.S. providers of NSS certified heavy lift launch, at least one of which may have little support from the commercial marketplace.



 Related Products 








Tool
Space Launch Market for Heavy Lift Vehicles

Apr 28, 2020
Bonnie L. Triezenberg, Jonathan Cham @JonathanKCham






Table of Contents

Chapter One
Introduction

Chapter Two
Understanding U.S. National Security Space Launch

Chapter Three
Understanding the Addressable Commercial Launch Market

Chapter Four
Strategic Choices Faced by U.S. Heavy Lift Launch Providers

Chapter Five
Assessing the Impact of USAF NSS Launch Acquisition Decisions on the NSS Market

Chapter Six
Assessing the Impact of USAF NSS Launch Acquisition Decisions on the Global Heavy Lift Launch Market

Chapter Seven
Observations and Recommendations

Appendix A
Data Sources

Appendix B
Methodology

Appendix C
Learning from History




Research conducted by

RAND Project AIR FORCE



This research was sponsored by the U.S. Air Force and conducted by the Force Modernization and Employment Program within RAND Project AIR FORCE.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Available

Print
Format: Paperback
Paperback Pages: 144
List Price: $38.00
Paperback Price:  $30.40
Paperback ISBN/EAN: 9781977403995
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RR4251
Document Number: RR-4251-AF
Year: 2020
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

MarketsMilitary Acquisition and ProcurementSpace Science and TechnologyUnited States Air Force

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Triezenberg, Bonnie L., Colby P. Steiner, Grant Johnson, Jonathan Cham, Eder Sousa, Moon Kim, and Mary Kate Adgie, Assessing the Impact of U.S. Air Force National Security Space Launch Acquisition Decisions: An Independent Analysis of the Global Heavy Lift Launch Market. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4251.html. Also available in print form.
Triezenberg, Bonnie L., Colby P. Steiner, Grant Johnson, Jonathan Cham, Eder Sousa, Moon Kim, and Mary Kate Adgie, Assessing the Impact of U.S. Air Force National Security Space Launch Acquisition Decisions: An Independent Analysis of the Global Heavy Lift Launch Market, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-4251-AF, 2020. As of December 17, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4251.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



