
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Lump Sum Digital Interventions Call  OC00S21X1838
  

  
  
  
    
  To deliver additional bolt-on activity to existing ESF projects in response to COVID-19 which addresses the digital divide, by providing access to information and services, through digital technologies. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      23 April 2021
      Last updated
      
        7 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Access to employment
      Location: 
      
North East, North West, Yorkshire and Humber, East Midlands, West Midlands, East of England, South East, South West

      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      4 June 2021
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application against this call specification. The information provided below is for reference purposes only.


Details

This additional activity must be wholly focussed on the loan of equipment and provision of data to existing ESF participants who would not otherwise have access to the internet, as complimentary to existing ESF provision.

For more information, download the 
call specification. 

Other documents required to assist  an application against this call are:

Digital Call Intervention Rate Calculator

Priority Axis 4 Eligibility Rules

ESF Lump Sum Digital Interventions Call MI Guidance

ESF Digital Call Application Guidance.

Location

The project must cover the All LEP areas outside Greater London Authority.

Value

Approximately £3,600,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: Midnight 04 June 2021

Completion date

Projects must be financially completed (i.e. have a proposed Financial Completion Date) no later than 31st December 2023; however, the Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.
The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to
E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details
If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.





      

      
        
    Published 23 April 2021
    Last updated 7 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 June 2021
              Lump Sum Digital Interventions Call  OC00S21X1838 project call is now closed.
            
            
              23 April 2021
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    