
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Competition: Map the Gap - autonomous gap crossing survey Phase 2
  

  
  

  
    
  DASA has launched phase 2 of Map the Gap; a competition to develop autonomous survey systems to help troops safely and stealthily advance over water.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      12 January 2021
      Last updated
      
        9 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Map the Gap: autonomous gap crossing survey Phase 2 Competition Document
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Innovation Standard Contract-Terms: (Map the Gap Phase 2)
    
        PDF, 457KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Innovation Standard Contract-Schedules: (Map the Gap Phase 2)
    
        PDF, 335KB, 10 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            


The Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) is launching Phase 2 of Map the Gap - autonomous gap crossing survey.

This competition is seeking technologies to demonstrate an automated or autonomous system to reconnoitre a potential wide wet gap crossing site. This includes both the navigation to and from potential crossing site and data collection.

Phase 1 of this competition has indicated that it was possible to integrate existing sensors to delivery platforms to gather the physical gap measurements required. Submissions for Phase 2 should consider how a final system would be deployed within a military context.

Phase 2 has up to £2 million available to fund multiple proposals.

For this phase we are encouraging collaboration between suppliers. To support this we have a short survey to collect details of suppliers who wish to explore collaboration possibilities.

This competition closes on Tuesday 9 March 2021 at midday (GMT).

There will be a further session of Map the Gap 1-to-1s on February 10 2021. Please register on  the Eventbrite page




        
      

      
    Published 12 January 2021
    Last updated 9 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 February 2021
              Section 5.3 Competition Document - Updated Risk Assessment Reference number
Section 8 Competition Document - Clarifications Annex added
            
            
              1 February 2021
              Additional 1-to-1 event arranged
            
            
              12 January 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        A Joint Effort – Integrating Advanced Materials onto Military Platforms
        Security Systems Programme
        CDE themed competition: affordable space-based capability
        Centre for Defence Enterprise marketplace: securing our future through innovation

  




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    