

The author of this report develops a quick-turn and open-source methodology that entails the calculation of four metrics: high-impact publications, collaborative network density, quality-adjusted patents, and organizational capacity for an analyst-defined science and technology area. After presenting the methodology, the author applies it to the field of artificial intelligence and machine learning for nine countries.




Read Online

An Open-Source Method for Assessing National Scientific and Technological Standing
With Applications to Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
by Jon Schmid
Related Topics: Bibliometrics, Emerging Technologies, Machine Learning
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download Free Electronic Document

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


1.6 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










The author of this report develops a quick-turn and open-source methodology for assessing national standing in science and technology (S&T) for a given field. The approach entails the calculation of four metrics: high-impact publications, collaborative network density, quality-adjusted patents, and S&T organizational capacity for an analyst-defined S&T area. Following its presentation, the methodology is applied to the field of artificial intelligence and machine learning for nine countries: Germany, France, the United Kingdom, South Korea, Japan, India, Russia, China, and the United States. Using this approach, the author finds that the United States ranks first in three metrics (high-impact publications, collaborative network density, and S&T organizational capacity) and second to China in quality-adjusted patents. The author concludes the report by using the data collected to implement the methodology to explore three additional topics: international patterns of collaboration, the role and research foci of particular organizations, and an application area: the intersection of artificial intelligence and cybersecurity technology.

Research conducted by

RAND National Security Research Division



This research was sponsored by the Department of Defense and conducted within the Cyber and Intelligence Policy Center of the RAND National Security Research Division (NSRD).This report is part of the RAND Corporation Research report series. RAND reports present research findings and objective analysis that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND reports undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 20
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RRA1482-3
Document Number: RR-A1482-3
Year: 2021
Series: Research Reports



Explore
Related Topics

BibliometricsEmerging TechnologiesMachine Learning

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Schmid, Jon, An Open-Source Method for Assessing National Scientific and Technological Standing: With Applications to Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1482-3.html.
Schmid, Jon, An Open-Source Method for Assessing National Scientific and Technological Standing: With Applications to Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A1482-3, 2021. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1482-3.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



