
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Industry Specialist Teaching Programme and Knowledge Exchange - OC35S19P1562
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project to support education providers including FE Colleges, Independent Training Providers, HE institutions, schools and other learning providers who are located within the Thames Valley Berkshire LEP area to increase the industry relevance of their skills and education provision.   

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      2 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        6 January 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      South East
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      20 December 2019
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Details

The Thames Valley Berkshire LEP Strategic Economic Plan 2020/21 and Skills Priority Statement 2018 alongside the Gearing up for STEAM Strategy and Action Plan and ESIF Strategy set out our vital skills priorities and identifies the main actions needed to address the current and expected skills shortages and skills gaps in our area.  One area that is particularly highlighted is to ensure that we build long-term relationships between our skills providers (schools, FE, independent training providers and HE institutions) and employers that deliver meaningful outcomes for our economy.

It is vital that local education providers have the relevant skills and sector knowledge to deliver the right level of training that is required by our local economy.  Evidence shows that it can difficult to recruit industry experts and this programme aims to provide a local solution.

The Service must be accessible to local educational providers and should provide knowledge exchange/teaching projects across a range of different sectors or subject areas particularly focused on the job families identified in our Skills Priority Statement 2018 and the STEAM skills identified in our STEAM Strategy and Action Plan.

The Service should aim to enable local educational providers to work with local employers and their teams to increase the number of industry specialists with teaching skills and the number of teaching staff who undertake CPD placements in industry. These opportunities will enhance the curriculum offer locally and inform the development of new qualifications that better meet the needs of the local economy.

Examples of the activities that the Service might provide includes


  Technology specialists trained to provide master classes in an educational establishment.
  Industry experts providing information on the latest technological changes in their industry, knowledge exchange meetings and visits to build collaborative relationships with employers and providers.
  Insight placements for teachers in industry settings to enable them to develop curriculum and a greater understanding of career opportunities.


Although projects undertaken by education providers as part of the Service can be with small or large employers engagement with SMEs is particularly encouraged.  Large employers should be proactively encouraged to engage SMEs within their supply chain with the programme.

A collaborative project between educational establishments across Thames Valley Berkshire is encouraged.

For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Thames Valley Berkshire LEP area.

Value

Approximately £1,237,500 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 20 December 2019

Completion date

Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.

The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details

If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 2 October 2019
    Last updated 6 January 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 January 2020
              Industry Specialist Teaching Programme and Knowledge Exchange - OC35S19P1562 project call has now closed.
            
            
              10 October 2019
              The following paragraph has been added to the Call Specification under the Call Outline section:
Specifically, it is expected that the project will work with the SEE Strategy Group and other employer facing services to ensure the service is understood as part of a package of skills support for employers particularly SME’s.
            
            
              2 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    