
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing service for extra care and supported living settings
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance on regular retesting for extra care and supported living settings that meet the eligibility criteria.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department of Health and Social Care

      
      Published
      7 December 2020
      Last updated
      
        1 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Testing service for extra care and supported living settings
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Department of Health and Social Care is extending the one-off round of testing to regular retesting for extra care and supported living settings that meet the eligibility criteria.

Regular retesting involves weekly staff testing and monthly resident testing.


See the coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care (ASC) settings page for:


  on-site testing for adult social care services: rapid lateral flow test guide
  step-by-step guide for ASC staff to self-test using rapid lateral flow tests
  rapid lateral flow testing in ASC settings: an overview
  coronavirus (COVID-19) testing: terms and conditions
  coronavirus (COVID-19) self-test for staff, service users and visitors in adult social care settings: privacy notice



Multiple registrations

From 1 July, you can use the new version of the record-keeping multiple registration spreadsheet. The updated spreadsheet will let you register polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests.

Ensure you only use the most recent version of the multiple upload spreadsheet to register coronavirus tests for your organisation.

You can register up to 100 tests on the spreadsheet. You’ll need to complete separate spreadsheets for staff and non-staff.

Organisations can still upload their testing data using the self-registration route. This is an additional option and does not replace the self-reporting routes.

You will need to read the guidance and download the multiple registration spreadsheet to record the details of people you’ve tested for coronavirus on that day.




        
      

      
    Published 7 December 2020
    Last updated 1 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 July 2021
              Updated to reflect changes that coronavirus test results can now be uploaded in bulk.
            
            
              22 April 2021
              Added link to the 'Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care settings' page and updated guidance to reflect the re-activation of the self-referral portal.
            
            
              25 February 2021
              Temporarily removed the HTML version of 'Testing service for extra care and supported living settings'.
            
            
              25 February 2021
              Updated version of 'Testing service for extra care and supported living settings' PDF.
            
            
              9 December 2020
              Updated with detail on when more test kits can be applied for.
            
            
              9 December 2020
              Updated to clarify use of the Unique Organisation Number on the self-referral portal.
            
            
              7 December 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        COVID-19: ethical framework for adult social care
        Evidence on the accuracy of lateral flow device testing
        Supported living services during coronavirus (COVID-19)
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing for adult social care settings

  




      

    Collection

  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): adult social care guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Testing for coronavirus (COVID-19)

  


  

  


    
  


    