    



 in late 2019 of a law that allows offshore turbines to operate for 30 years, Japan has begun in earnest its journey away from fossil fuels and nuclear energy.The two wind farms of the ¥100 billion Akita project will generate with a capacity of 140 MW, enough electricity to power at least 150,000 of Japan’s 52 million homes. By 2030 Japan plans to have installed a total of 10 GW, and the country’s possibilities are even greater. The International Energy Agency estimates Japan has enough technical potential to satisfy its entire power needs nine times over.


Japan can take advantage of the technology advances and cost improvements the offshore wind industry has made since its early days in Denmark in the 1990s. Today, it can learn from the experiences of other countries, not only in creating the turbines and wind farms but also in building markets, setting offtake prices, and designing regulation and financial incentives.In only a handful of decades, offshore wind has become one of the core power-generation technologies of Europe, with installed capacity of 22 GW


 and about 100 GW planned by 2030.


 Taiwan and the United States have already commissioned the first small projects and plan for more than 10 and 25 GW by 2030, respectively.


 During the industry’s 30-year evolution, costs have fallen so sharply that offshore wind now compares favorably with competing energy sources.But that does not mean Japan’s journey will be simple. It will require multiple players, including regulators, utilities, and investors, to do their part in a country where the public remains skeptical about offshore wind’s cost competitiveness with other power sources. Japan has the additional challenge of needing floating platforms for a majority of the sites because of its deep coastal waters as well as turbines that can withstand earthquakes and typhoons and make use of low wind speeds.All these challenges are surmountable, and some of them offer Japan the opportunity to become a leader in developing new technology. The country is on the cusp of joining the global offshore wind scale-up club at the most opportune time in the industry’s history.
    
In this article, we lay out the benefits of offshore wind for Japan; the lessons Japan can draw from Europe, Taiwan, and the United States; and the five critical steps to harnessing the opportunities and overcoming the hurdles it will face. Benefits and opportunitiesThere are key benefits and opportunities for Japan to seize as it moves into offshore wind. They range from the chance to forge an entirely new export industry to shaking off the country’s dependence on foreign and carbon-intensive energy sources. This is because offshore wind achieves five objectives.
    
    
    
    
    

    

    
Lessons from Europe, Taiwan, and the East Coast of the United StatesThe offshore wind industry has made great strides over the past three decades as it spread around the globe. Taiwan and states along the northeast coast of the United States provide particularly apt examples of how to successfully adopt technology advances and learn from the lessons of early European experiences. From 2010 to 2019, the global weighted average levelized cost of electricity (LCOE)


 from renewables decreased by 30 to 80 percent. Today, all technologies are in the range of cost competitiveness with fossil-power generation.Europe (from the first decade in 2000)Following Denmark’s adoption of offshore wind energy in the early 1990s, European offshore wind took off in the first decade of the 2000s. The United Kingdom and Germany developed markets for offshore wind energy through strong government support and subsidies. Initial projects were complex and comprehensive in scope. Transmission system operators (TSOs) or developers were responsible for connecting offshore facilities to the onshore grid they operated. Large subsidies kick-started the development of local content and the infrastructure that was needed to get the industry off the ground. Over time, governments were able to reduce their involvement. Auctions were introduced to drive down costs, which led to an industry that is now largely cost-competitive against other sources, such as natural gas.Taiwan (from 2016)Taiwan built on Europe’s experience. A generous initial feed-in tariff scheme supported the building of local infrastructure, while Taipei’s commitment to adequate future volume allowed for cost reductions. By the second phase, Taiwan was able to graduate to a more competitive bidding process. Between the initial feed-in-tariff and the tender, prices fell by almost 60 percent


 (Exhibit 3). This allowed the government to renegotiate the terms of the first project.
    
East Coast of the United States (from 2016)
        


    
    On the US East Coast, states such as Rhode Island and Massachusetts leap-frogged the initial stages of Europe and Taiwan. Support schemes were introduced only for a small number of initial demonstration projects while the main projects were directly auctioned in a competitive bidding process. Massachusetts, for example, has already achieved low prices for its first large project: In 2018 the state awarded Vineyard Wind a contract for an 800 MW wind farm at a price of $65 per MWh. In 2019, the 804 MW Mayflower wind farm even achieved $58 per MWh, 76 percent less than Rhode Island paid in its contract for the Block Island Wind Farm nine years earlier.Harnessing the opportunities and overcoming the hurdlesFive factors are critical to establishing Japan’s offshore wind industry and the supply network that supports it.
    
    
    
    
    

        


    
    Japan has good reason to pursue offshore wind energy and has picked an opportune moment to join the international scale-up club. Not only does developing offshore wind offer a way to stimulate the economy in one of the most severe global downturns in living memory but also the industry itself has made great strides across the globe since its inception in Denmark in the 1990s. Taiwan and the United States, in particular, have shown the advantages of taking on the lessons of pioneers, such as Germany.Undeterred by deep water and difficult wind conditions, Tokyo has begun to build the foundations to meeting its sizable wind energy potential and shifting away from coal, nuclear,
and foreign suppliers. Many of the country’s unique challenges are also its greatest opportunities. With rigorous stakeholder alignment, coherent market design, and supportive regulatory and financial conditions, Japan could become an industry leader in developing the technology and processes needed in deep water and challenging wind conditions.