
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: New Anglia Careers Hub Call (OC24S19P1653) 
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project that will put employers at the heart of inspiring and informing young people about the opportunities in the workplace, and helping them to develop some of the key skills that employers are looking for.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      23 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        16 January 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      East of England
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      15 January 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Details

Employers will be given the opportunities to partner with schools and organisations that work with young people outside school.  They will co-create activities and information which cover job opportunities, new technologies, business developments and local skills shortages, and will engage directly with young people.  The successful applicant(s) will also work closely with teachers, parents and other professionals that work with young people (including training and careers guidance professionals).

Applicants will need to demonstrate that employers are at the heart of their approach and that employers will lead the strategic governance and local operational priorities of the project.

Successful applicants will also consider the challenges and opportunities identified in the Sector Skills Plans.  A cross-cutting analysis of the Sector Skills Plans identified careers inspiration as a common priority across all sectors.  Applicants may wish to consider particular sectors which will be a priority in their project delivery, or aim to provide inspiration on the full range of opportunities in the New Anglia LEP area.   They should take account of the opportunities within the strategic opportunity areas discussed in the Local Industrial Strategy.
Successful applicants will also show how their activity will enable schools to meet the Gatsby benchmarks.

For more information, download the call specification.

This section should set out what type of project/project activities/target participants this call is seeking to address the local needs set out in the Local Priorities section of the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the New Anglia LEP area.

Value

Approximately £800,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 15th January 2020

Completion date

Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.

The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to
E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details
If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 23 October 2019
    Last updated 16 January 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 January 2020
              New Anglia Careers Hub Call (OC24S19P1653) project call is now closed.
            
            
              23 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    