
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19): guidance for people receiving direct payments
  

  
  

  
    
  Advice for people who buy care and support through a direct payment, as well as local authorities, clinical commissioning groups and those who provide care and support.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department of Health and Social Care

      
      Published
      21 April 2020
      Last updated
      
        24 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Guidance for local authorities and clinical commissioning groups in the delivery of direct payments and personal health budgets
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants (easy read)
    
        PDF, 2.2MB, 35 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Direct payments and personal health budgets (easy read)
    
        PDF, 3.62MB, 18 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@dhsc.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: the most important things to know
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex A: template contingency plan
    
        ODT, 12.5KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  

  
      
  
  
    Annex B: example documentation
    
        ODT, 10.5KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance sets out the main messages for individuals and organisations that can support planning, and help slow the transmission of the coronavirus as the outbreak progresses across the country.

It’s accompanied by additional guidance (third and fourth attachments), mostly aimed at direct payment holders, that directly responds to questions and concerns previously raised by direct payment holders, personal assistants, and charities and organisations that support them.



        
      

      
    Published 21 April 2020
    Last updated 24 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 August 2021
              ​Updated to include guidance on self-isolation that came into effect on 16 August.
            
            
              19 August 2021
              Updated to meet step 4 guidelines on the correct use of PPE and using direct payments to buy PPE.
            
            
              19 July 2021
              Update to 'Guidance for local authorities and clinical commissioning groups in the delivery of direct payments and personal health budgets' to reflect the lifting of restrictions as part of step 4 of the roadmap.
            
            
              19 July 2021
              Updated 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants' in line with the lifting of most legal restrictions to control COVID-19 from 19 July 2021, as we move to Step 4 of the COVID-19 roadmap.
            
            
              29 June 2021
              Updating guidance to show the supply of free PPE to all of Adult Social Care, is until the end of March 2022.
            
            
              27 April 2021
              Updated 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants (easy read)' with new version. Page 30 now says: 'Anyone who has a direct payment can access regular testing.'
            
            
              11 March 2021
              Added 'Direct payments and personal health budgets' easy read.
            
            
              18 November 2020
              Updated the attachment 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants' and easy read, and the attachment 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: the most important things to know'. The updates reflect current national policy and add sections on mental health support, accessing the winter flu vaccination and testing.
            
            
              11 September 2020
              The document 'Guidance for commissioners, people receiving direct payments and care providers' has been changed to 'Guidance for local authorities and clinical commissioning groups in the delivery of direct payments and personal health budgets.' This guidance is no longer aimed at people receiving direct payments (as separate guidance has been issued on this), and now is aimed at commissioners and local government only. The easy read version of 'Guidance for commissioners, people receiving direct payments and care providers' has also been removed.
            
            
              31 July 2020
              Updated 3 attachments: 'Guidance for commissioners, people receiving direct payments and care providers', 'Guidance for commissioners, people receiving direct payments and care providers (easy read)' and 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants'. Updates reflect that the self-isolation period for people with coronavirus symptoms has changed to 10 days rather than 7 days.
            
            
              22 July 2020
              Page 3 of the document 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants (easy read)' has been updated to say that if you can’t talk to anyone, you can still use your direct payment in a different way to make sure you still get the care and support you need during COVID-19. Just make sure you keep notes of how you spent your direct payment differently during this time so that the council or clinical commissioning group can understand this.
            
            
              10 July 2020
              Removed following paragraph from 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants': 'You should keep a temporary record of the shift patterns of your PAs for 21 days. If NHS Test and Trace ask for this data, you should provide it to them. This could help contain clusters or outbreaks.'
            
            
              6 July 2020
              Added easy read document 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants'.
            
            
              1 July 2020
              Edited HTML publication 'Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants'. Added information about keeping a temporary record of the shift patterns of PAs for 21 days.
            
            
              10 June 2020
              The document ‘Coronavirus (COVID-19): Q&A for people receiving a personal budget or personal health budget’ has been updated and renamed ‘Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: full guidance for people receiving direct payments and personal assistants’. Changes to this document include the addition of case studies, and there are new sections on PPE, testing and the flexible of use of direct payments. 
Two other documents have been added: ‘Guidance for commissioners, people receiving direct payments and care providers (easy read)’ and ‘Using direct payments during the coronavirus outbreak: the most important things to know’. 
The document ‘Coronavirus (COVID-19): guidance for people receiving direct payments’ has been renamed ‘Guidance for commissioners, people receiving direct payments and care providers’. There are no other changes to this document.
            
            
              7 May 2020
              The guidance attachment and the Q&A attachment have been updated to make sure they're consistent with the latest PPE guidance from Public Health England, in particular what PPE should be worn during a time of sustained COVID-19 transmission.
Also, questions have been added to the Q&A attachment on footwear, the use papers towels and responsibility for paying for PPE.
            
            
              21 April 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): adult social care action plan
        COVID-19: supporting adults with learning disabilities and autistic adults
        Coronavirus (COVID-19): health and wellbeing of the adult social care workforce
        Coronavirus (COVID-19): reducing risk in adult social care
        Adult Social Care Infection Control Fund

  




      

    Collection

  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): adult social care guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Infectious diseases
        Social care
        Healthcare workers, carers and care settings during coronavirus 

  


  

  


    
  


    