
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Denmark: providing services and travelling for business
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance for UK businesses on rules for selling services to Denmark.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for International Trade, Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, and Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      28 February 2019
      Last updated
      
        11 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Trade and services regulations in Denmark

        
        
          Trade reservations

        
        
          
VAT on sales of digital services

        
        
          Ownership of companies registered in Denmark

        
        
          Business travel and entry requirements

        
        
          Social security payments for employees

        
        
          Recognition of professional qualifications

        
        
          Data transfer and GDPR


        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Read this page in combination with the guidance for the EU, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland.


The authoritative source for Danish market regulations is the government of Denmark. This guidance links to official Danish sources wherever possible.

Trade and services regulations in Denmark

If you are a UK business providing services in Denmark, you must follow Danish regulations about:


  getting an authorisation or a licence to provide a service
  complying with local business regulations
  
EEA nationality requirements which could prevent you from providing services in some sectors


Use the Danish Business Authority portal to:


  find out about providing services in Denmark
  understand local regulations
  complete any relevant administrative procedures online


Consider appointing an English-speaking lawyer in Denmark to help you comply with specific regulations. You can also contact your local chamber of commerce for advice.

To find out if EEA nationality requirements apply to you, contact the appropriate competent authority or the Danish Business Authority.

Trade reservations

To sell or provide services to customers in Denmark, you must follow local laws. If in doubt, you should get professional advice.

Reservations are part of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement. They reserve the right of each party to keep or make new laws restricting investment, or the sale of services, in ways that would otherwise breach the rules in the agreement.

Check which reservations apply to the sale of services from the UK to Denmark. This includes an interactive tool to find reservations that are already in place.


VAT on sales of digital services

To use the UK’s VAT Mini One Stop Shop (MOSS) to declare sales of digital services to EU consumers, businesses need to register for MOSS in an EU member state.

Find out more about paying VAT on sales of digital services.

Ownership of companies registered in Denmark

If you have a UK business, you might face restrictions on your ability to own, manage or direct a registered company in Denmark or any other EEA country.

For information about setting up and running a business in Denmark, visit Invest in Denmark.

Read more about this in our guidance relating to the EEA and Switzerland.

Ownership of legal firms in Denmark

UK legal professionals who have investments in law firms in Denmark should contact the Danish Bar and Law Society for information on implications on those investments.

Business travel and entry requirements

UK business travellers and service providers may need a visa, work permit or other documentation.

Check our travel to Denmark for work guidance for detailed information on:


  types of visa and work permit routes available
  exemptions that may apply to you or the activity you are planning to undertake


The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and New to Denmark websites have more information about:


  visas including intra-corporate transfers
  work and residence permits
  supporting documentation
  other conditions


For advice on specific situations, companies in the UK and UK nationals can write to the Danish Agency for International Recruitment and Integration using this website.

Check which actions travellers visiting Europe need to take.

Social security payments for employees

Find out if you need to pay National Insurance in the UK or social security contributions in Denmark.

Recognition of professional qualifications

To check what you need to do in Denmark, read:


  our guidance on professional qualifications in the EEA and Switzerland

  Denmark’s Ministry of Higher Education and Science’s guidance on professional qualifications for UK citizens


If you need to take action to secure the recognition of your professional qualification in Denmark, these sources can help you:


  
Danish NARIC, the information centre for the professional recognition of qualifications
  the Danish single point of contact on the Danish Business Authority website
  the Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science



The UK Centre for Professional Qualifications (UK CPQ) provides practical assistance and advice to:


  professionals who qualified overseas and are interested in working in the UK

  
UK professionals seeking to practise overseas



UK statutory auditors working in Denmark

For UK statutory auditors, the Danish Business Authority should be able to provide further information.


UK lawyers working in Denmark

If you’re a UK-qualified lawyer working in Denmark, using either a Danish or UK professional title, you should contact the local Bar association in the region where you are working or the Danish Bar and Law Society (site in Danish) for specific advice.

Data transfer and GDPR


On 28 June 2021, the EU formally adopted ‘adequacy decisions’ for the UK, delivered through:


  Article 45 of the GDPR
  Article 36 of the Law Enforcement Directive


‘Adequacy decisions’ allow for the ongoing free flow of personal data from the EU/EEA to the UK.

Read guidance on using data in your personal business or other organisation.





      
        
    Published 28 February 2019
    Last updated 11 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              11 June 2021
              Added 'Trade reservations' guidance. Updated 'Recognition of professional qualifications' with new UK contact point.
            
            
              28 December 2020
              Updated the following sections to reflect the changes created by the UK and EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: overview, trade regulations, VAT on sales of digital services, business travel and entry requirements, social security payments for employees, recognition of professional qualifications, and data transfer and GDPR.
            
            
              1 December 2020
              Guidance for ‘Business travel and entry requirements’, ‘Social security payments for employees’ and ‘Recognition of professional qualifications’ updated.
            
            
              25 October 2019
              New guidance under the Business travel and entry requirements section for UK nationals
            
            
              14 October 2019
              Change to title to include travelling for business
            
            
              10 October 2019
              Update to 'Business travel and entry requirements' section
            
            
              28 February 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        France: providing services and travelling for business
        Estonia: providing services and travelling for business
        Luxembourg: providing services and travelling for business
        Poland: providing services and travelling for business
        Bulgaria: providing services and travelling for business

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Travel to Denmark for work

  




      

    Collection

  


        Providing services and travelling for business to the EU, Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein: country guides

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Exporting

  


  

  


    
  


    