
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    DVSA privacy notices
  

  
  

  
    
  Privacy notices for Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) activities and services.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency

      
      Published
      25 May 2018
      Last updated
      
        1 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Book and manage your theory test: privacy notice (tests to 3 September 2021)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Book and manage your driving test: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Book and manage theory tests for your pupils: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Become and be an MOT tester: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Book and manage driving and riding tests for your pupils: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Check the MOT history of a vehicle: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Disclosure and barring service: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Driving instructor appeals: privacy notice 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA consultations: privacy notice 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA counter-fraud: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA court cases: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA CCTV and body-worn cameras: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA intelligence and targeting: privacy notice 
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA International Road Haulage Permits Office: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    DVSA social media: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Get MOT reminders: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Motorcycle training and instructor: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Pay a DVSA roadside fine: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Report a lorry, bus or coach driver or company: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Report an MOT tester: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Report someone making or selling unsafe or illegal vehicles or parts: privacy notice   
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Set up and run an MOT test station: privacy notice
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
These privacy notices explain how DVSA collects, uses and stores your personal information during certain activities, or when you use its services.

The DVSA personal information charter explains more about your rights over your personal data.




        
      

      
    Published 25 May 2018
    Last updated 1 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 November 2021
              Added 'Disclosure and barring service: privacy notice'.
            
            
              22 October 2021
              Updates to:

Approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services: privacy notice - Some minor changes to the way personal data is processed to do with ADI standards checks.

Book and manage your driving test: privacy notice - Minor changes to this privacy notice to take into account changes to ADI standards checks. Addition to section four about securely destroying provisional driving licences.

DVSA CCTV and body-worn cameras: privacy notice - Changes to ownership of cameras at theory test centres and retention periods of static CCTV cameras. Also, addition of statement around DVSA using suppliers to install, maintain and in some cases monitor CCTV.
            
            
              13 October 2021
              Edited the DVSA CCTV and body-worn camera privacy notice to include a link to guidance about how to request your personal information held by DVSA that's come from CCTV or body-worn cameras.
            
            
              1 October 2021
              Updated 'Motorcycle training and instructor: privacy notice'
Added information about data we collect from:

- the person reporting a training incident 
- the instructor and trainee about the incident
- witnesses
- police officers who attended the incident
- who we may share incident details with.
            
            
              20 August 2021
              Updated section 3 ('why we need it') of the 'Approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services: privacy notice' to add information about supporting your ongoing performance.
            
            
              19 July 2021
              Added 'Report someone making or selling unsafe or illegal vehicles or parts: privacy notice'.

Updated privacy notice for "Book and manage your theory test: privacy notice' to show that it only applies for tests to 3 September 2021. Added link to privacy notice for new service for tests on or after 4 September 2021.
            
            
              23 April 2021
              Updated section 4 ('what we do with it') of the 'DVSA counter-fraud: privacy notice' to add using Microsoft Photos as a way DVSA processes data.
            
            
              23 April 2021
              Added 'Report an MOT tester: privacy notice'.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              Updated section 3 ('why we need it') of the 'Approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services: privacy notice' to add 'Update driver details so that they match those on the DVLA database'.
            
            
              19 March 2021
              Edited section 6 ‘Where it might go’ of ‘DVSA social media: privacy notice.’ 

Hootsuite now processes data in the United States of America.
            
            
              19 February 2021
              Updated 'Book and manage your driving test: privacy notice.'

Edited section 2. What data we need - added the lawful basis for processing as a 'public task.'

Edited section 5. How long we keep your data – added new statement saying we will hold “electronic copies of your driving test booking for 7 years.”
            
            
              28 January 2021
              Added new notices: 

Pay a DVSA roadside fine: privacy notice 
Book and manage driving and riding tests for your pupils: privacy notice 
Check the MOT history of a vehicle: privacy notice
Get MOT reminders: privacy notice
Motorcycle training and instruction: privacy notice
            
            
              9 December 2020
              Updated the privacy notice for DVSA intelligence and targeting to add information about the service to check an HGV is ready to cross the border.

Updated the privacy notice for DVSA International Road Haulage Permits Office to add more information about why we need the data.
            
            
              10 August 2020
              Added privacy notices for DVSA intelligence and targeting, DVSA consultations, and social media use.
            
            
              30 July 2020
              Updated the privacy notices for booking and managing your driving test and approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services to add the legal basis for sharing information with NHS Test and Trace.
            
            
              25 June 2020
              Updated the privacy notices for booking and managing your driving test and approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services to add information about sending your information to the NHS Test and Trace Service (Test and Protect in Scotland, and Test, Trace, Protect in Wales) if a DVSA member of staff you had close contact tests positive for coronavirus (COVID-19).
            
            
              11 March 2020
              Added information to the privacy notices for theory tests and driving tests about using GOV.UK Notify to send emails and text messages.
            
            
              20 February 2020
              Added a privacy notice for driving instructor appeals.
            
            
              17 February 2020
              Updated the CCTV and body-worn cameras privacy notice to explain that an external company (Pearson VUE) is the data controller for CCTV in theory test centres.
            
            
              13 February 2020
              Updated the privacy notice to give the definition of CCTV and reference that CCTV may be used in staff investigations. Made reference to redaction software to protect the identity of others.
            
            
              13 January 2020
              Added a privacy notice for court cases.
            
            
              22 November 2019
              Added content about how DVSA share and keep driving test data.
            
            
              17 September 2019
              Added approved driving instructor (ADI) registration and services privacy notice.
            
            
              16 September 2019
              Added a privacy notice for reporting a lorry, bus or coach driver or company.
            
            
              3 September 2019
              Updated the DVSA International Road Haulage Permits Office privacy notice to say that we will share anonymised data with GOV.UK and the Government Digital Service on how you used the site to apply for permits.
            
            
              19 June 2019
              Added a privacy notice about counter-fraud.
            
            
              14 June 2019
              Added a privacy notice for booking and managing theory tests for your pupils, and updated the privacy notice for the DVSA International Road Haulage Permits Office.
            
            
              31 May 2019
              Added a privacy notice about the use of CCTV and body-worn cameras.
            
            
              11 December 2018
              Updated the privacy notice for the service to book and manage your driving test to clarify how information is used for research projects.
            
            
              26 November 2018
              Added the privacy policy for the DVSA International Road Haulage Permits Office.
            
            
              12 November 2018
              Added privacy policies for becoming an MOT tester and setting up an MOT test station.
            
            
              25 May 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate and operational information (transport)

  


  

  


    
  


    