
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Opioid substitution treatment: guide for keyworkers
  

  
  

  
    
  Advice for drug treatment and recovery workers to help them to deliver safe and effective OST to service users.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      21 July 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Part 1: introducing opioid substitution treatment (OST)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Part 2: supporting service users to start opioid substitution treatment (OST)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Part 3: supporting service users to get the most out of opioid substitution treatment (OST)
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Part 4: supporting opioid detoxification
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Part 5: resources and further reading
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Glossary
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Authors and acknowledgements
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guide provides drug treatment and recovery workers with the information they need to deliver good quality opioid substitution treatment (OST) to service users. It will also help them have more effective conversations about OST with service users and the local multidisciplinary team, including prescribers.

Drug misuse and dependence: UK guidelines on clinical management (also known as the Orange Book) outlines national guidance on best practice in drug treatment including OST.

This guide focuses on what drug treatment and recovery workers need to know in their day-to-day OST practice. It supports them to provide the best possible treatment for OST service users in line with clinical guidelines.

This guidance includes the following sections:


  Introducing OST: this describes how to have effective initial conversations about OST.
  Supporting service users to start OST: this outlines how to prepare and support service users as they start OST.
  Supporting service users to get the most out of OST: this explains how to monitor, support and review someone’s OST, and looks at what to do if someone’s OST is not working for them. It outlines the roles of drug treatment workers and the multidisciplinary team in optimising treatment or switching between OST medications.
  Supporting opioid detoxification: this outlines how to support service users to reduce and stop OST through detoxification.
  Resources and further reading: practical resources for day-to-day practice and other useful documents.
  Glossary: this explains the terms commonly used in OST and drug and alcohol treatment and recovery.
  Authors and acknowledgements.


This guide is a product of PHE’s OST good practice programme. The programme has also developed other OST good practice resources including:


  the Best practice in Optimising Opioid Substitution Treatment (BOOST) e-learning programme, which includes short films showing typical clinical conversations between people who are on OST and their drug treatment and recovery workers
  an OST service self-assessment tool, to help commissioners and drug treatment service providers assess what they are doing and what more they could do to deliver OST in line with best practice





        
      

      
    Published 21 July 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Opioid substitution treatment: service self-assessment tool
        Treating substance misuse and related harm: turning evidence into practice
        Drug misuse treatment in England: evidence review of outcomes
        Routes to recovery from substance addiction
        Injectable opioid treatment: commissioning and providing services

  




      

    Collection

  


        Alcohol and drug misuse prevention and treatment guidance

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Drug misuse and dependency

  


  

  


    
  


    