
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Export controls: military goods, software and technology
  

  
  
  
      
  Guide to licensing requirements and restrictions for trade control and the export of controlled military goods, software and technology.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      6 September 2019
      Last updated
      
        13 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Controlled military items

        
        
          Controlled dual-use items

        
        
          When you need an export licence

        
        
          Trade controls and arranging sales or movements

        
        
          Goods for which you cannot arrange sales or movement (category A goods)

        
        
          Goods subject to strict trade controls (category B goods)

        
        
          Controls on category C goods

        
        
          Overlap between sanctions and strategic export controls

        
        
          Trade controls for embargoed destinations

        
        
          Trade control licences

        
        
          Transfer of information (technology controls)

        
        
          Military end-use controls

        
        
          Goods you must not export

        
        
          Breaches of export control legislation

        
        
          
ECJU contact details

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

An export licence is needed before the export of controlled military goods, software and technology and items on the UK dual-use list from the United Kingdom to another country. These items are listed in Schedule 2 and 3 to the Export Control Order 2008, as amended.

A trade control licence is needed before engaging in certain activities that involve:


  the supply or delivery of certain items from one country to another
  the agreement to supply or deliver certain items from one country to another
  any activity that will promote the supply or delivery of certain items from one country to another


You can assess your goods, software and technology against the UK Strategic Export Control Lists to determine whether or not they are controlled.

The OGEL and Goods Checker Tools can be used to:


  help determine if the items are controlled
  identify the appropriate control entry


You can apply for a licence through SPIRE, the online export licensing system. SPIRE is managed by the Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU).

Controlled military items

Controlled military items include physical goods, software and technology (specific technical information and data), specially designed or modified for military use. They are specified in Schedule 2 to the Export Control Order 2008, as amended.

Controlled dual-use items

UK controlled dual-use items are specified in Schedule 3 to the Export Control Order 2008. They are not necessarily specially designed or modified for military use.

Controlled dual-use items include:


  firearms and ammunition
  security and paramilitary police equipment
  riot-control vehicles
  chemical and biological agents
  explosives and energetic material
  explosive detection equipment requiring export authorisation to certain destinations
  firings sets and detonators
  certain materials, chemicals and micro-organisms
  tropospheric scatter communications equipment
  vessels and aircraft requiring authorisation to certain destinations
  related technology for controlled goods and certain firearms not otherwise specified in Schedule 2 to the Export Control Order 2008, as amended



You can find the complete list on the UK Strategic Export Control Lists.

When you need an export licence

You must have an export licence if you are exporting items that are on the UK Strategic Export Control Lists and you are in the UK, or a UK residence overseas.

You can apply for a licence through SPIRE.

Trade controls and arranging sales or movements

A trade control licence is required for activities subject to trade controls in the UK or for a ‘UK person’ outside of the UK.

The term ‘UK person’ as used in the Export Control Order 2008, is defined in s.11 of the Export Control Act 2002 as a United Kingdom national, a Scottish partnership or a body incorporated under the law of any part of the United Kingdom. A United Kingdom national is an individual who is: (a) a British citizen, a British Overseas Territories citizen, a British National (Overseas) or a British Overseas citizen; (b) a person who under the British Nationality Act 1981 (c. 61) is a British subject; or (c) a British protected person within the meaning of that Act.

Trade controls apply to specific activities, including brokering, that involve certain controlled goods. The trade control legislation imposes different restrictions to different categories of goods. These are contained in Part 4 of the Export Control Order 2008, as amended.

Goods which are subject to trade controls are specified in category A, category B or category C, of Schedule 1 to the Export Control Order 2008, as amended.

Trade controls do not apply to ML21 or ML22 (software and technology).

A trade control licence is also required for specific activities involving goods subject to trade controls from one third country to another third country that is an embargoed destination.

There are also controls related to brokering of military and other items contained in trade sanctions. Read guidance on sanctions and embargoes.

Goods for which you cannot arrange sales or movement (category A goods)

There is a ban on trade controlled activities relating to category A goods which includes:


  cluster missions, explosive submunitions and explosive bomblets
  goods for the execution of human beings
  torture goods, such as: electric shock batons, electric chairs, drug injection electric-shock belts, leg irons and sting sticks


A full list of category A goods is contained in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to the Export Control Order 2008, as amended.

For goods in category A, or where the activity is to an embargoed destination, you can not supply or deliver, agree to supply or deliver or do any activity that will promote the supply or delivery of category A goods.

This includes:


  arranging, or agreeing to, the transfer, acquisition or disposal of goods
  general advertising and promotion (for example placing advertisements)
  arranging or providing freight or transport services
  finance, financial services, insurance or reinsurance services
  arranging or negotiating contracts or contract promotion activity


A ‘contract promotion activity’ means any act calculated to promote the arrangement or negotiation of a contract for the acquisition, disposal or movement of goods or any agreement to do such an act.

This applies in cases where you know or have reason to believe that such action or actions will, or even may, result in the removal of those goods from one third country to another third country.

Restrictions on category A goods apply to any company or a person from within the UK (whether or not they are a UK person) or by any UK person operating overseas, whether directly or indirectly.

Goods subject to strict trade controls (category B goods)

There are strict trade controls on activities relating to category B goods.

These controls apply to goods and components including:


  small arms and light weapons (SALWs) within ML1 and ML2
  accessories and ammunition for SALWs in ML1 and ML2
  light weapons within ML4
  ammunition for light weapons within ML4
  hand grenades specified in ML4
  anti-vehicle landmines
  combat aircraft and attack helicopters within ML10
  warships within ML9
  long range missiles (LRMs) with a range over 300km
  unmanned air vehicles (UAVs)
  man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS) and accessories, ammunition, and specially designed components therefore
  other missiles and missile launchers
  battle tanks and armoured vehicles within ML6
  production equipment specially designed for MANPADS, including field test equipment specially designed for MANPADS and specialised training equipment and simulators for MANPADS



A trade control licence is required to:


  supply or deliver category B goods
  agree to supply or deliver category B goods
  do any activity that will promote the supply or delivery of category B goods


This applies in cases where you know or have reason to believe that such action or actions will, or even may, result in the removal of those goods from one third country to another third country.

This includes:


  arranging, or agreeing to, the transfer, acquisition or disposal of goods
  general advertising and promotion (for example placing advertisements)
  arranging or providing freight or transport services
  finance, financial services, insurance or reinsurance services
  arranging or negotiating contracts or contract promotion activity


Restrictions on category B goods apply to any company or a person from within the UK (whether or not they are a UK person) or by any UK person operating overseas, whether directly or indirectly.

A licence is not required for category B goods if your only involvement in the transaction is to provide financing or financial services, insurance or reinsurance service, general advertising or promotion services or a contract promotion activity where a payment is not received.

Controls on category C goods

Trade controls on category C goods includes all other goods in the UK Military List not listed above and certain substances for the purpose of riot control or self-protection and related portable dissemination equipment.

For category C goods, a trade control licence is required to:


  supply or deliver category C goods
  agree to supply or deliver category C goods
  do any activity that will promote the supply or delivery of category C goods


This applies in cases where you know or have reason to believe that such action or actions will, or even may, result in the removal of those goods from one third country to another third country. This includes:


  arranging, or agreeing to, the transfer, acquisition or disposal of goods
  general advertising and promotion (for example placing advertisements)
  arranging or providing freight or transport services
  finance, financial services, insurance or reinsurance services
  arranging or negotiating contracts or contract promotion activity


A licence is not required for category C goods if your only involvement in the transaction is to provide one of the following:


  financing or financial services
  insurance or reinsurance services
  general advertising or promotion services
  contract promotion activity where a payment is not received


Restrictions on category C goods apply to any company or a person from within the UK (whether or not they are a UK person). Controls on category C goods are not fully extra-territorial, they apply to activities of UK persons carried out in the UK only. They do not apply to the activities of UK persons undertaken wholly overseas.

Overlap between sanctions and strategic export controls

The export of and other trade in military goods and technology is controlled under sanctions regulations and the Export Control Order 2008, and so you may need a licence which is valid under both pieces of legislation. This means that all licence applications relating to military goods and technology will need to be considered against the sanctions licensing purposes, and the strategic export licensing criteria. A licence under sanctions regulations is unlikely to be granted if a licence is refused for the same activity under the Export Control Order 2008.

The way this will work in practice is that we will consider an application for a licence which relates to activities that are licensable under both the sanctions regulations and the Export Control Order 2008 as an application under both pieces of legislation. This means that only a single licence application is required.

The application will be considered against the relevant licensing criteria. If a licence is granted it will be valid under both the Export Control Order 2008 and the sanctions regulations.

Trade controls for embargoed destinations

Embargoed destinations are those subject to full-scope EU, OSCE and national arms embargoes. Controls apply to category A, B and C goods traded to embargoed destinations. Article 20 of the Export Control Order 2008, as amended sets out what trade controls apply in respect of embargoed destinations. Article 20 does not apply to destinations with arms embargoes made under the Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2018.

Read guidance on sanctions and embargoes.

Trade control licences

There are 4 open general trade control licences (OGTCLs) available.

If you can not use an OGTCL, you must apply for a Standard Individual Trade Control Licence.

You can apply for a licence through SPIRE.

Transfer of information (technology controls)

You must get an export licence to transfer controlled technology to anyone outside the UK.

Technology includes any information necessary for the development, production or use of goods.

This includes any of the following that are related to military items and software:


  blueprints
  diagrams
  technical and training manuals
  intangible technology such as emails


Find out how military and dual-use technology is defined for export controls.

You can use the control list classification advisory service to assess goods and technology against the UK strategic export control lists.

Military end-use controls

The military end-use control is a catch-all control in the EU Dual Use Regulation 428/2009. This means that even if the items which you intend to export are not listed on the current UK Military List, you might still require an export licence under this control.

An exporter is usually told by the ECJU that an export licence is required for one of two reasons. Either you are exporting non-controlled items that are, or may be, intended for use with military equipment in an embargoed destination, or you are exporting non-controlled items that may be intended for use as parts of military goods illegally obtained from the UK, irrespective of destination.

If you have any concerns about your end user, you can get advice through SPIRE.

Goods you must not export

You must not export any goods and services if they might be used for weapons of mass destruction (WMD) purposes. This including chemicals, biological agents or technology that might be used in a nuclear weapons facility.

This restriction covers:


  technical assistance such as assembly, maintenance or repair
  services and goods


Breaches of export control legislation

As an exporter, you may discover that you have exported goods or transferred controlled technology without an appropriate export licence in place. It is also possible that a compliance inspector from the Export Control Joint Unit will identify an irregularity during a compliance audit.

If this happens, it is very important to report the irregularity to HMRC (sometimes known as ‘voluntary disclosure’) as soon as possible, as they are responsible for the enforcement of strategic export controls. If the irregularity was found on an ECJU compliance audit, the compliance inspector will have informed HMRC and you are strongly advised to do the same.

Please post or courier hard copies of the voluntary declaration to:



Enforcement of Strategic Exports, Sanctions and Intellectual Property Rights 
Customs Debt, Enforcement and Law 
Customs and Border Design  
HMRC 
14 Westfield Avenue 
Stratford
London E20 1HZ




Email declarations should be sent to michael.halstead@hmrc.gov.uk


You should provide:


  details of the export, including dates
  any relevant documents, such as export documentation and commercial invoices
  details of how the breach was discovered, why it occurred and what steps you have put in place to ensure it does not happen again


HMRC will consider the matter and contact you directly, either for more information or to let you know of their decision.

If you wish to confidentially report export control breaches HMRC have a hotline or alternatively you can use an online reporting tool.  You will find details of both here.


ECJU contact details

Contact the helpline for general queries about strategic export licensing.


    Helpline

    
      Export Control Joint UnitDepartment for International Trade
Old Admiralty Building
Admiralty PlaceLondonSW1A 2DY
    

    
        
          Email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 020 7215 4594
        
    

    Contact for general queries about strategic export licensing.




During the COVID-19 period, you should email amanda.thompson@hmrc.gov.uk to report a breach of export control legislation.


Notices to exporters

Notices to exporters from the ECJU contain important information about:


  amendments to open general export licences
  changes to the list of controlled goods
  updates on legislation and sanctions


Sign up to receive email alerts to notices to exporters.

Training and seminars

ECJU provides a comprehensive programme of scheduled and bespoke seminars on different aspects of UK export controls

Find out more in the export control training bulletin.





      
        
    Published 6 September 2019
    Last updated 13 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              13 October 2021
              New address and email added for breaches of export control legislation.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              New guidance for UK exporters relating to destinations covered by an arms embargo.
            
            
              16 April 2020
              Added email address for use during COVID-19 period.
            
            
              6 September 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  

      
    
      Part of
          
            Export goods from the UK: step by step
          
        
  


      
    
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 1:
                  
                
              

              
                Check if you need to follow this process
              
          

          
              Follow these steps if you're moving goods permanently from: 

              
England, Wales or Scotland (Great Britain) to a country outside the UK
Northern Ireland to a country outside the UK and the EU


              What you need to do is different if you are:

              
moving goods between Great Britain and Northern Ireland or Northern Ireland and the EU 
sending goods through the post 
taking a small amount of goods personally to sell abroad 
taking goods temporarily out of the UK 


              Learn about exporting, including making export plans, on great.gov.uk 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 2:
                  
                
              

              
                Check the rules for exporting your goods
              
          

          
              Check duties, rules and restrictions for your goods in the destination country 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      and
                  
                
              

              
                Apply for any licences you need to export your goods
              
          

          
              There are special rules and you may need to get licences or certificates if you are exporting any of the following:

              
animals and animal products 
plants and plant products 
drugs and medicines 
medical devices 
chemicals 
ozone-depleting substances and F-gases 
radioactive substances 
diamonds 
art works, antiques and culturally significant goods 
waste 
goods that could be used for torture or capital punishment 
firearms, ammunition and related equipment 
You are currently viewing: military goods, services and technology 
items that can have both civil and military uses 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 3:
                  
                
              

              
                Get your business ready to export
              
          

          
              You need an EORI number that starts with GB to export goods from England, Wales or Scotland.

              If you move goods to or from Northern Ireland you may need one that starts with XI.

              Get an EORI number 

              Check if you need to register for VAT 

              There are processes that can make clearing customs quicker and easier to manage if you export goods regularly.

              
Find out about using simplified declaration procedures 
Check if you can use Common Transit to move your goods 
Check if Authorised Economic Operator status is right for you 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      and
                  
                
              

              
                Check whoever's receiving the goods can import them
              
          

          
              The business or person receiving the goods to may need:

              
to make an import declaration in their country
licences or certificates to receive goods from the UK


              Check whoever you are sending the goods to is able to import them into their country.

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 4:
                  
                
              

              
                Decide who will make export declarations and transport the goods
              
          

          
              You can hire someone to deal with customs and transport the goods for you, or you can do it yourself. 

              
Find out how to hire someone to deal with customs for you 
Find out how to make export declarations yourself 
Find out how to transport goods out of the UK by road 


          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 5:
                  
                
              

              
                Classify your goods
              
          

          
              You must find the right commodity code to classify the goods you're exporting.

              Your customs agent or transporter might be able to help you with this.

              Find the right commodity code for your goods 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 6:
                  
                
              

              
                Prepare the invoice and other documentation for your goods
              
          

          
              The completed invoice and any licences or certificates must travel with the goods.

              When filling in the value of your goods on the invoice, use the price you’re selling them for. If you're not selling the goods, use the market value of the goods. List any freight or export insurance you included in the price separately.

              You may need proof of origin if exporting to a country where your goods have a reduced or zero rate of duty.

              Get proof of origin for your goods 

              You might be able to zero rate the goods for VAT. This means you can charge your customers VAT at 0%.

              Check if you can zero rate the goods for VAT 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 7:
                  
                
              

              
                Get your goods through customs
              
          

          
              If you've appointed someone to deal with UK customs for you, they'll make the declaration and get your goods through the UK border.

              Make an export declaration and get your goods cleared by UK customs 

              You may need other documentation to get your goods into the destination country. Ask the person or business buying your goods what information you need to provide.

              Check how to bring goods back into the UK if they were rejected for import at another country’s border 

          

        
        
          
            
              
                
                  
                      Step 8:
                  
                
              

              
                Keep invoices and records
              
          

          
              You must keep commercial invoices and any customs paperwork. 

              If you're VAT registered, record the goods in your VAT accounts even if they are zero-rated.

              Find out how to record the goods in your VAT accounts 

              If you exported controlled goods, for example firearms, keep the paperwork that shows who owns the goods.

          

        
    
  











    