
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    NHS population screening: education and training
  

  
  
  
      
  Resources to support screening professionals in their initial training and continuing professional development (CPD).

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      8 December 2017
      Last updated
      
        2 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          e-Learning

        
        
          Screening programme resources

        
        
          Antenatal and newborn screening timeline

        
        
          Warwick health screening module

        
        
          Warwick health screening one-day workshop

        
        
          Screening masterclass

        
        
          Neonatal and paediatric intensive care units: learning resource

        
        
          Antenatal and newborn screening resource

        
        
          Student midwife pack

        
        
          Recommended reading

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Use this guide to:


  download tools to help explain screening
  access e-learning
  access programme specific training
  sign up for screening training


e-Learning

Most e-learning for the NHS screening programmes is available on the e-Learning for Healthcare (e-LfH) website. This includes the introduction to population screening module, which explains what screening is and how screening programmes are implemented in the NHS.

We also have an All our Health module on population screening, which is ideal for health and care practitioners who do not work directly in screening to find out more about the NHS screening programmes and what they can do to support them.

Neither of these modules require registration.


Read about the screening courses available and sign up for e-LfH


Screening programme resources

Read further training information on GOV.UK about the:


  abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) programme
  bowel cancer screening (BCSP) programme
  breast screening (BSP) programme
  cervical screening (CSP) programme
  diabetic eye screening (DES) programme
  fetal anomaly screening programme (FASP)
  infectious diseases in pregnancy screening (IDPS) programme
  newborn and infant physical examination (NIPE) screening programme
  newborn blood spot (NBS) screening programme
  newborn hearing screening programme (NHSP)
  sickle cell and thalassaemia (SCT) screening programme


Antenatal and newborn screening timeline

The antenatal and newborn timeline shows optimum times for NHS antenatal and newborn screening tests to take place.


  
      
  
  
    Antenatal and newborn screening timeline
    
        PDF, 974 KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



Watch an animated antenatal and newborn screening timeline


Warwick health screening module

The Warwick Medical School health screening module looks at:


  what screening is
  the different elements that make up a screening programme
  how to understand and interpret screening tests
  cost-effectiveness in screening
  ethics
  quality
  how screening programmes can be effectively monitored and improved


The course is available as a postgraduate award or part of the masters in public health programme.

We will update this page when the date for the 2022 course and details of potential bursaries are confirmed.

Warwick health screening one-day workshop

Warwick University also runs a one-day health screening workshop where delegates explore:


  how we decide to introduce a new screening programme
  the ethics and economics of screening
  the quality assurance of programmes


This workshop is suitable for any staff involved in providing NHS screening programmes. This includes:


  screening technicians
  commissioners
  quality assurance and fail-safe staff
  GPs
  midwives
  public health managers
  practice managers


Screening masterclass

The screening masterclasses are for staff working in public health who are responsible for commissioning, managing or delivering national screening programmes for their local populations.

The masterclasses are also suitable for screening leads within NHS provider Trusts.

Prof Anne Mackie often attends face-to-face sessions for part of the day, to answer questions from attendees.

Course content

The day sessions include information on:


  what screening is (and is not)
  defining a high-quality screening service
  public health skills - and tips for commissioning high-quality screening programmes
  how to identify common problems, and share experiences
  the role and remit of the UK National Screening Committee
  an overview of policy and practice of current NHS screening programmes


The sessions are interactive and use a variety of teaching methods, including case studies and practical exercises.

The case studies include:


  commissioning new services
  assessing appropriateness and quality of services
  accountability for screening services
  managing clinicians and patient expectations



For more information, see the example agenda.


  
      
  
  
    Screening masterclass example agenda
    
        PDF, 90.3 KB, 1 page
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



Places are limited. Virtual masterclasses are currently free of charge. A £48 fee is usually charged to cover the venue and catering for face-to-face masterclasses.

Screening e-learning module

The module on screening covers the evaluation and delivery of screening. It is aimed at both new and experienced practitioners.

The module is written by Dr Angela Raffle. It contains useful information and evidence relating to screening, as well as examples of how this can be applied as part of daily practice.

Neonatal and paediatric intensive care units: learning resource


Download the NICU and PICU resource if you work in a:


  neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
  paediatric intensive care unit (PICU)



To support you in ensuring the infants and babies in your care are offered screening in a timely manner, use this self-directed tool to:


  get an overview of screening within the NICU and PICU environment
  work through scenarios and examples


When you’ve used the resource, make sure to reflect on your learning and use it as evidence of continuing professional development.

Antenatal and newborn screening resource


Download the antenatal and newborn screening resource


This interactive presentation replaces the pocket-sized resource cards that used to be provided to midwives. It includes important information on all the antenatal and newborn screening programmes, with illustrations and links to films, e-learning and other resources.

Use the resource to:


  discuss screening with women and their families
  facilitate informed choices


Student midwife pack

This resource was previously distributed in hard copy to all new student midwives at the start of each academic year. We have now made the information electronic in line with ‘digital first’ and to enable content to be up-to-date at all times. It contains links to education and training resources, an explanation of recessive inheritance and a copy of the interactive resource information for midwives to use with women to support informed choice.


Download the pack


Recommended reading

Sense about Science has published a useful guide called Making Sense of Screening. This helps people to weigh up the benefits and harms of health-screening programmes. Prof Anne Mackie, Office for Health Improvement and Disparities (OHID) Director of Screening, was one of the contributors to the guide.





      
        
    Published 8 December 2017
    Last updated 2 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              2 December 2021
              Updated the chapter about the Warwick health screening module to remove references to the 2021 course and add a holding line about the 2022 one.
            
            
              5 July 2021
              Updated the section relating to the Warwick health screening module.
            
            
              4 February 2021
              Added link to the new All our Health module on population screening.
            
            
              20 January 2021
              Updated information about the Warwick health screening module funding.
            
            
              12 January 2021
              Updated information on the screening masterclasses.
            
            
              17 November 2020
              Link to online form added for people to apply for the 2021 Warwick health screening module.
            
            
              9 July 2020
              Updated the section about the Warwick health screening module with 2021 date.
            
            
              17 July 2019
              Replaced NHS screening timeline with new publication and updated information on Warwick health screening course places because applications for funding for 2019 have now closed.
            
            
              20 June 2019
              Added information on screening masterclass and e-learning module.
            
            
              12 June 2019
              Added deadline date for applying for a bursary for Warwick module funding.
            
            
              22 May 2019
              Added details of 'Warwick health screening module' timetable.
            
            
              4 January 2019
              Added link to 'Making Sense of Screening' guide on the Sense about Science charity website.
            
            
              3 December 2018
              Added information on 'antenatal and newborn screening resource'.
            
            
              6 June 2018
              Closing date added for applications for funded places on Warwick screening module.
            
            
              23 May 2018
              Added links for Warwick health screening module funding application, course details and timetable.
            
            
              27 March 2018
              Added online masterclass resource information.
            
            
              25 January 2018
              Added information about the student midwife pack.
            
            
              8 December 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Sickle cell and thalassaemia screening: education and training
        Infectious diseases in pregnancy screening: education and training
        Sickle cell and thalassaemia counselling knowledge and skills
        Bowel cancer screening: education and training
        Diabetic eye screening: education and training

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Population screening: evidence and guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    