
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Living in Kosovo
  

  
  
  
      
  Advice for British people living in Kosovo including information on health, education, benefits, residence requirements and more. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      31 October 2013
      Last updated
      
        23 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Coronavirus

        
        
          Health

        
        
          Education

        
        
          Employment and recognised qualifications

        
        
          Entry and residence requirements

        
        
          Benefits

        
        
          Driving licences and vehicles

        
        
          Guidance on bringing medication into country Kosovo

        
        
          Sponsoring family members

        
        
          Returning to the UK

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This guide sets out essential information for British national residing in Kosovo, including advice on health, education, benefits, residence requirements and more.

We are unable to provide any guidance on general lifestyle enquiries apart from the information and links listed below. See our information on what consulates can and cannot do for British nationals.

Coronavirus

You should follow the advice of the Kosovan government and your local authority. You can also read our Kosovo travel advice for our latest guidance.

For information on getting a COVID-19 vaccine as a UK national in Kosovo see our coronavirus travel advice.

Health

If you are a resident in employment, you are entitled to the same health benefits as a Kosovo national. The health system in all parts of Kosovo is suffering from widespread shortage of medicines and other essentials. As the country remains outside the EU, your GHIC Card is of little use, and all medical treatment will involve some cost.

Before you travel, we highly recommend taking an adequate travel health insurance to cover the cost of any medical treatment abroad and repatriation.

The British Embassy cannot give financial assistance for medical purposes.

If you need urgent assistance, call 112 and speak to the Kosovo Emergency Centre.

Education

Education in Kosovo is regulated by the Ministry of Education Science and Technology. Education starts in either pre-schools or primary schools. Children enroll in primary schools at the age of 6 and it lasts for nine years. Primary education is compulsory to all children age 6 to 15 years and is free of charge.

Employment and recognised qualifications

British nationals can work in Kosovo provided that they have a work permit.

Work permits are issued by the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare and are issued for a limited period of time, depending on the type of permit.

Please check the Law on Foreigners for more information.

Entry and residence requirements

British citizens visiting Kosovo do not require a visa to enter Kosovo. You may be required to provide documentary evidence giving a reason for your entry and stay to local authorities when entering Kosovo. A 90-day entry stamp will be issued which is renewable for longer stays.

British citizens intending to stay in Kosovo for longer than 90 days must apply for temporary residence permit before the 90 days are up.

Applications to renew a temporary residence permit must be made at the Division for Foreigners, Visa and Residence Permit.

Please check with the Division for Foreigners, Visa and Residence Permit at the Kosovo Ministry of Internal Affairs for the full list of documents that will be required in your case, as well as explanations regarding different types of residence since all applications are looked at individually according to the applicant’s circumstances.

For more information, please see the Kosovo Government Law on Foreigners.

Benefits

To find out what UK benefits you might be able to get while abroad and how to claim them please visit benefits if you’re abroad and moving and retiring abroad.

Driving licences and vehicles

The British Embassy cannot issue or renew a UK driving licence. Contact the DVLA for information about renewing a licence or applying for a new licence

To drive in Kosovo, you must have a valid driving licence. If you are taking your car, you must have vehicle registration / ownership documents and a locally valid insurance policy.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs is the responsible authority for registration of vehicles.

Guidance on bringing medication into country Kosovo

Information on bringing medication and other goods in Kosovo can be found on the website of Kosovo Customs.

Sponsoring family members

If you want to sponsor a family member, the first point of contact should be the Kosovo Embassy in London.

Returning to the UK

Before you leave Kosovo, you should submit the residence permit card to the Division for Foreigners, Visa and Residence Permit and notify them of your departure.

Disclaimer

This information is provided as a general guide and is based upon information provided to the embassy by the relevant local authorities and may be subject to change at any time with little or no notice. The FCDO and the British Embassy will not be liable for any inaccuracies in this information. British nationals wishing to obtain any further information must contact the relevant local authority.




      
        
    Published 31 October 2013
    Last updated 23 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 March 2021
              Coronavirus section added with a link to guidance on vaccines
            
            
              31 October 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Notarial and documentary services guide for Kosovo

  




      

    Collection

  


        Living in country guides

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Europe

  


  

  


    
  


    