
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Using pupil premium: guidance for school leaders
  

  
  
  
      
  How school leaders can use their pupil premium funding effectively, complete their strategy statement and information about pupil premium payments. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      18 October 2019
      Last updated
      
        1 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Developing and delivering an effective strategy

        
        
          Request a review

        
        
          Pooling pupil premium in academy trusts

        
        
          3-year strategy

        
        
          Non-eligible pupils

        
        
          Academically able pupils

        
        
          Pupil premium plus

        
        
          Service pupil premium

        
        
          Strategy statements

        
        
          Strategy statement templates

        
        
          School allocations

        
        
          Eligibility and funding rates

        
        
          Pupils who move schools

        
        
          Alternative provision schools

        
        
          Errors in payments

        
        
          Allocation changes from the 2021 to 2022 financial year

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

This is advice for school leaders and anyone else involved in managing the use of pupil premium (and recovery premium in the 2021 to 2022 academic year – guidance and conditions of grant for future years will be published in due course) in schools.

It may also be useful for governing boards, parents and local authorities who want to know how schools can use their pupil premium effectively and the reporting requirements.

There’s separate guidance which gives a brief overview of the pupil premium.

Pupil premium in the 2021 to 2022 academic year

As in previous years, continue to use the pupil premium to improve the attainment of your disadvantaged pupils. The disproportionately high impact of COVID-19 on the education of disadvantaged pupils makes this more important than ever.

For 2021 to 2022, you are required to:


  use your recovery premium alongside your pupil premium funding and report on your use of them as a single sum in your strategy statement

  use our template to publish your strategy statement - see condition 8 of the conditions of grant
  publish your strategy statement by 31 December 2021 - this enables you to take the needs of your new intake into account
  demonstrate how your spending decisions are informed by a range of evidence - see condition 7 of the conditions of grant


Developing and delivering an effective strategy

1. Identify the specific challenges faced by your disadvantaged and vulnerable pupils

Diagnostic assessment is crucial for understanding the specific elements of education that pupils are finding challenging, rather than performance in whole subjects. For example, a focus on the specific vocabulary required in different subject areas.

See the Education Endowment Foundation’s (EEF) diagnostic assessment resource for further information.

You should also develop an understanding of any non-academic challenges that pupils are facing that are negatively affecting their education and impact their access to teaching, for example:


  attendance and levels of persistent absence
  behaviour incidences and exclusions data
  wellbeing, mental health and safeguarding concerns
  access to technology and educational materials
  high mobility


When identifying challenges, you should draw on a range of data sources including discussions with teachers and support staff and engagement with pupils and families.

2. Create a strategy plan to address the key challenges

Consider taking a longer-term approach to your use of pupil premium funding. 3-year plans are recommended.

Your plan should focus on the controllable challenges that are having the most significant adverse impact on your disadvantaged pupils.

Use a balanced structure to help map out your approach. The EEF’s Pupil Premium Guide recommends that you adopt a tiered model which focuses on:


  high-quality teaching
  targeted academic support
  wider strategies


Ensure that you consult school leaders and other relevant staff members, for example, the designated safeguarding lead, the designated teacher, and the special educational needs coordinator (SENCo). You should also consult relevant external partners, such as the Virtual School Head.

3. Use evidence to assess the merit of any activity that you consider implementing

You should:


  consult a wide range of independent, high-quality reviews of evidence, such as the evidence summaries published by EEF

  assess whether the evidence is based on a context relevant to your school
  consider how to be an effective consumer and challenge evidence claims made by external providers


Evidence of the impact of activity can help you to set the outcomes that you want to achieve by the end of your plan.

4. Implement your plan

You should consider:


  how to integrate the activity with the curriculum
  what changes will be needed to existing ways of working
  which pupils will get what activity, when and in what group size
  how to ensure all staff promote the principles and ethos of your strategy, such as high aspiration
  professional development requirements, taking the standard for professional development into account
  requirements of external providers if you are using them
  what data and resources will be required to monitor the impact of each activity


See EEF’s Putting Evidence to Work – A School’s Guide to Implementation for further information.

5. Evaluate your strategy

When evaluating impact, you should:


  measure success based on outcomes for disadvantaged and vulnerable pupils
  implement a robust and transparent evaluation framework and report outcomes against this
  ensure evaluation is an ongoing process - strategies that have been effective in one year may not continue to be effective


When evaluating impact, you should not:


  use data that does not focus on pupil outcomes
  base evaluation on the reactions of those delivering the activity
  use vague intended outcomes from the start, making an accurate assessment of improvements more difficult


6. Sustain your strategy

The outcomes of your evaluation will inform your decision whether to sustain or stop each activity.

Where a strategy is successful, it is particularly important to continue monitoring implementation. Enthusiasm for approaches may reduce in subsequent years and additional professional development and resources are likely to be required for new and existing staff to maintain successful outcomes.

Request a review

You can request a pupil premium review to help you identify more effective ways to use your pupil premium.

Pooling pupil premium in academy trusts

Academy trusts may wish to pool resources and set a strategy for use of pupil premium and recovery premium funding across multiple academies. Trusts must ensure that any such strategy is flexible enough to accommodate the specific needs of each school’s disadvantaged pupil cohort.

Each school must publish or update a strategy statement by 31 December every year.

3-year strategy

Taking a longer-term approach by planning your use of pupil premium over multiple years (3 years is recommended) can make it easier to plan your spending, recruitment, teaching practice and staff development.

If you use a multi-year approach, you must review your strategy and publish an updated strategy statement every academic year before 31 December.

Non-eligible pupils

You do not have to spend your pupil premium so it solely benefits eligible pupils. You can use it to support other pupils with identified needs. For example, you might decide to spend it on pupils who do not get free school meals but:


  have or have had a social worker
  act as a carer


Evidence from across the English school system shows that using your pupil premium funding to improve teaching quality is the most effective way to improve outcomes for disadvantaged pupils. By doing so, you will inevitably benefit non-eligible pupils as well.

Academically able pupils

Pupil premium funding is not allocated based on academic ability. Your pupil premium allocation will be based on all of the eligible pupils in your school.

Evidence shows that academically able pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds are most at risk of under-performing. These pupils should receive just as much focus in your use of pupil premium as less academically able pupils.

Pupil premium plus

Pupil premium plus is funding to help improve the attainment of looked-after children and previously looked-after children. As with pupil premium, it is not a personal budget for individual children.

Children who are looked after by the local authority

For looked-after children, pupil premium plus is managed by each local authority’s Virtual School Head for the purpose of supporting their educational attainment.

Your designated teacher should work with Virtual School Heads to ensure that pupil premium plus for looked after children in your school is used to meet the needs identified in their personal education plans.

Local authorities are expected to release these payments as soon as possible to schools, but they may choose to retain a portion of it to fund activities that will benefit a group, or all, of the authority’s looked-after children.

Pupils who were previously looked after by the local authority

Pupil premium plus for previously looked-after children is managed by the child’s school, alongside their pupil premium funding. The designated teacher has a key role in ensuring the specific needs of previously looked-after children are reflected in how the school uses its funding to support these children.

Your designated teacher should:


  ensure adoptive parents and guardians are aware that they can declare their child eligible for pupil premium plus and work with them in deciding how the funding should be used
  consult the Virtual School Head on how to use the funding effectively, where appropriate
  be the main contact for queries about the use of pupil premium plus


Service pupil premium

Service pupil premium is additional funding for schools, but it is not based on disadvantage. It has been combined into pupil premium payments to make it easier for you to manage your spending.

The funding is for pastoral support for eligible pupils.

The strategy statement template includes an optional section to report on how you are using the service pupil premium and its impact on eligible pupils.

There’s separate guidance published by the Ministry of Defence on the service pupil premium.

Strategy statements

Local authority-maintained schools and academies must produce and publish a strategy statement every year using the DfE template.

You have until 31 December to publish your statement each year. This will enable you to take the needs of your new intake into account.

Purpose of the strategy statement

The strategy statement is an accountability tool for the benefit of parents and governors and trustees. You should write it with them in mind.

It is for you to provide an overview of your current strategy for improving the attainment of disadvantaged pupils, including how you intend to use your pupil premium (and recovery premium) funding and the outcomes achieved in the previous academic year.

It is not:


  part of your management accounting obligations
  intended to monitor within-class or within-school attainment gaps
  used by DfE to allocate future funding


Ofsted inspectors will only use your statement to help them prepare for their visit.

Reporting on wider strategy outcomes

It can be challenging to evaluate the impact of any activity that is not directly linked to academic outcomes, for example, activity supporting social and emotional wellbeing. You should still write about this in your online statement and refer to any evidence that shows you’re making progress.

Instructions



Read this guidance, the relevant example statement and the EEF pupil premium guide, before you produce your strategy statement.


Complete the DfE template, save the document (for example as a PDF file) and publish it on your school’s website.


Ensure you review and update your strategy statement before 31 December each academic year even if you are using a multi-year strategy.



Strategy statement templates

From the 2021 to 2022 academic year, you must use the template provided to publish your statement – this is a condition of your funding.

If you have already adopted a multi-year strategy that will continue this academic year, you do not need to develop a new strategy, but must use the new template to outline your existing strategy by 31 December.


Pupil premium statement template (MS Word Document, 30.8 KB)

Pupil premium statement example (primary) (MS Word Document, 70.9 KB)

Pupil premium statement example (secondary) (MS Word Document, 63.6 KB)

Pupil premium statement example (special) (MS Word Document, 55.4 KB)


Format of the blank template

The format of the template is designed to:


  help you show parents and governors and trustees how you are supporting disadvantaged pupils in your school to improve their attainment
  enable you to demonstrate  that you are meeting the requirements of the conditions of grant
  reflect the process for developing an effective pupil premium strategy (in line with the guidance on this page and the EEF pupil premium guide), which may help you in developing your more detailed underpinning plans


Part A is for you to explain your strategy to improve outcomes for disadvantaged pupils, including how you intend to use your pupil premium (and recovery premium) funding in the current academic year, and the evidence that supports each activity.

Part B is for you to explain what the outcomes of your strategy in the previous academic year were for disadvantaged pupils.

There is an optional further information section to provide any additional information you wish to publish.

Performance measures related to coronavirus (COVID-19)

The template for the 2021 to 2022 academic year does not include a requirement to enter information relating to performance measures given the impact of COVID-19 on their production and publication.

In future academic years, the template will incorporate requirements relating to performance measurement data.

School allocations

Pupil premium is paid quarterly on a financial year basis. The first instalment is paid in late June for maintained schools and early July for academies.

Your school’s allocation will be published in March, helping you to plan ahead.

The full payment schedule is published in the conditions of grant. You can also view the pupil premium funding allocations that have been given to each school and at national, local authority and parliamentary constituency level.

‘Key to success’ data download

If you need to check which pupils your school’s allocation is based on you can consult key to success from April each year.

Key to success cannot be used for planning or delivering the pupil premium strategy as it is a retrospective list of eligible pupils based on the October census. For pupils in alternative provision settings, we use the January census.

Eligibility and funding rates

School allocations are calculated based on the number of pupils who attend the school who are eligible for pupil premium funding.

The eligibility criteria and per pupil rates are published in the conditions of grant. There are separate conditions of grant for:


  
local authorities (relating to pupil premium for state-funded schools)
  academies and free schools


Pupils who move schools

As pupil premium is not an entitlement for individual pupils, you do not get an adjustment if a pupil leaves your school or joins another school.

The only exception is for permanently excluded pupils.

Excluded pupils

We’ll reduce pupil premium payments by the value of one pupil, pro-rated to the point in the financial year when the pupil left, for sending schools.

We’ll credit receiving schools by the value of one pupil, pro-rated to the point in the financial year when the pupil left the sending school.

Alternative provision schools

Alternative provision (AP) settings, with eligible pupils recorded in the census, will receive the pupil premium like all other state-funded schools.

You can include a pro-rata pupil premium sum in the cost of a place for pupils placed in AP settings:


  on a part-time basis
  who joined after the census


We’ll provide funding to local authorities for eligible pupils who are educated in independent special schools based on the number of such pupils in their area.

Errors in payments

Contact DfE if you’ve mistakenly recorded a pupil as eligible for the pupil premium.

We can change the national pupil database for you to correct individual pupil errors but we cannot amend your census return.

Allocation changes from the 2021 to 2022 financial year

Mainstream and special schools

Funding will be based on October 2020 census data instead of using the January census as was the case in previous years.

Alternative provision, pupil referral units and hospital schools

There will be no change to the allocations process.

About the census change

This change brings pupil premium allocations in line with how the rest of the core schools’ budget is calculated.

The change also provides earlier clarity for schools on their allocations. In this transitional year, pupil premium allocations have been confirmed within the usual timeline in June 2021. From 2022, the annual pupil premium allocations for mainstream and special schools will be published in March.

There’s further information in the conditions of grant where you’ll also find the allocations for each school and at national, local authority and parliamentary constituency level.

Financial impact of the pupil premium census change

Total pupil premium funding is increasing to more than £2.5 billion in the 2021 to 2022 financial year. This means:


  funding is up £60 million on the previous year
  most schools across England will see an increase in funding
  87% of local authorities will see an increase in pupil premium funding


Pupil premium funding is in addition to the £3 billion to support education recovery. As part of this, £280 million will be allocated to schools through the recovery premium which, building on the pupil premium, will be targeted at schools most in need of supporting pupils with disadvantaged attainment. This additional support far outweighs the impact of moving the pupil premium census date from January to October.

This table shows the financial impact of moving to the October census on the annual pupil premium allocations for the 2021 to 2022 financial year. It compares the number of pupils that get the pupil premium in the 2021 to 2022 financial year with the number of pupils that would have attracted the pupil premium if the January census had been used.


  
    
      
      Primary pupils
      Secondary pupils
      Total
    
  
  
    
      Number of pupils
      67,189 fewer recipients
      4,973 additional recipients
      62,216 fewer recipients
    
    
      Financial impact
      £92,445,582 less funding
      £2,589,472 more funding
      £89,856,109 less funding
    
  


The overall impact is approximately £90 million. This does not mean that pupil premium funding is decreasing - total pupil premium funding is increasing compared to the previous year.

In addition to the pupil premium, pupils who are eligible for free school meals, or have been at any point in the last 6 years (“FSM6”), also attract funding through the schools national funding formula (NFF). We are also moving to use the October census, not the January census in the NFF, which in this case, means moving from the January 2020 to the October 2020 census. This will increase the amount of funding allocated through the FSM6 factor in the 2022 to 2023 financial year, as free school meals eligibility increased significantly between January and October last year.





      
        
    Published 18 October 2019
    Last updated 1 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 November 2021
              Added pupil premium statement examples for primary, secondary and special schools.
            
            
              6 September 2021
              We have added the template you must use to publish your statement for the 2021 to 2022 academic year. This includes a requirement to demonstrate how your spending decisions are informed by a range of evidence. We have also added new guidance on developing and delivering an effective strategy and made some changes to make the actions you need to take clearer.
            
            
              23 July 2021
              We have updated information on the templates that you must use to publish your statement for the 2021 to 2022 academic year.
            
            
              24 June 2021
              Added an updated version of 'Allocation changes from the 2021 to 2022 financial year' which was previously published on another webpage.
            
            
              30 March 2021
              Updated with a link to ‘Pupil premium: allocations and conditions of grant 2021 to 2022’ and added information on the requirements of schools.
            
            
              20 December 2019
              Amended the 'pupil premium plus' section to make the designated teacher's actions clearer.
            
            
              5 December 2019
              Amended wording for adoptive parents to match the wording in the designated teacher statutory guidance.
            
            
              18 October 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pupil premium
        Pupil premium: allocations and conditions of grant 2021 to 2022
        Recovery premium funding
        Catch-up premium: coronavirus (COVID-19)
        Coronavirus (COVID-19) recovery premium funding: allocations

  




      

    Collection

  


        School improvement support

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Pupil premium and other school premiums 

  


  

  


    
  


    