
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Forensic science 'lessons learnt': issue 3
  

  
  

  
    
  The Forensic Science Regulator publishes lessons that can be learnt from quality failings. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Forensic Science Regulator

      
      Published
      9 May 2019
      Last updated
      
        22 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Lessons learnt, issue 3
    
        PDF, 120KB, 3 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
An overview of the lessons that can be learnt from a number of quality referrals submitted to the Forensic Science Regulator relating to the lack of competence and/or integrity.

You can view the previous version of this guidance on the national archives.



        
      

      
    Published 9 May 2019
    Last updated 22 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 September 2020
              Updated guidance.
            
            
              9 May 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Forensic pathology: audit report 4
        Forensic pathology: audit protocol
        Forensic Science Regulator newsletter: number 18
        Forensic Science Regulator newsletter: number 35
        Forensic science 'lessons learnt': issue 7

  




      

    Collection

  


        Forensic Science Regulator newsletters and reports

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Crime, justice and law

  


  

  


    
  


    