PADUCAH, Ky. -- Mikee Buchanan and Grayson Parish, eighth-graders at Heath Middle School, were recently selected as winners of this year’s U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) West Kentucky Regional Science Bowl t-shirt design contest. Local middle and high school students were given the design challenge by DOE’s Portsmouth/Paducah Project Office as part of the annual Science Bowl competition to be held in February. The Heath Middle School students collaborated on a shirt design that reflected their interests, both academically and personally. “We wanted to showcase our love for our wonderful state of Kentucky and also our love of science in its simplest form,” said Buchanan.  “We wanted the opportunity to represent our school artistically and academically,” added Parish.  “Plus, it’s fun to have a chance to win money for our school.”Heath Middle School received $500 as a prize.“Mikee and Grayson are third-year Science Bowl team members for Heath Middle School.  They are very hard workers and are dedicated to Science Bowl studying and practices, while also playing multiple sports,” said Heath Middle School Science teacher Brandy Roberts.  “We are so very thankful to DOE for hosting the West Kentucky Regional Science Bowl each year.  It is an honor and joy to get to participate.” This is the third year for the DOE Science Bowl t-shirt design contest and the 12th year for the DOE Science Bowl West Kentucky Regional competition.  The Science Bowl attracts dozens of schools and hundreds of regional students to compete for the opportunity to advance to the national level. “The Science Bowl is a unique opportunity for students in our local communities to utilize their quick-recall skills, refresh their memories of key scientific topics, and compete against some of the region’s most advanced students,” said Jennifer Woodard, DOE Paducah Site Lead. The competition will be hosted at the University of Kentucky’s College of Engineering Paducah Campus in Crounse Hall.  High school students will compete on February 7.  Middle school students will compete on February 21. 