
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Export Development Guarantee
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out about our Export Development Guarantee: its benefits, eligibility criteria and how to apply.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Export Finance

      
      Published
      21 July 2020
      Last updated
      
        8 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Benefits

        
        
          Eligibility criteria

        
        
          Guidance for companies transitioning out of fossil fuel exports

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Application process

        
        
          More information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Our Export Development Guarantee (EDG) helps companies who export from, or plan to export from the UK access high value loan facilities for general working capital or capital expenditure purposes. We can provide support for finance provided by a commercial lender, which does not need to be linked to a specific export contract.

We can provide partial guarantees covering up to 80% of the risk to lenders for a maximum repayment period of up to 5 years, or up to 10 years if the loan is to develop clean growth exports such as renewable energy. We can consider transactions from a minimum of £25 million. The average value of EDG transactions is expected to be between £100 million and £500 million.

The guarantees we can provide for each transaction will usually support lending in GBP, but lending in US dollars, Euros or Japanese yen may also be considered.

Benefits

EDG provides additional capacity to support the private market on high value transactions.

The benefits of our EDG for UK exporters include:


  the flexibility to bid for multiple contracts with a secure source of working capital
  extra financing capability for scaling up existing export activities
  support for investment activities to increase future export activities
  repayment terms up to 5 years, or up to 10 years where the funds are used solely to support clean growth activities


Eligibility criteria

All transactions supported by UKEF must satisfy our:


  anti-bribery and corruption policy
  environmental, social and human rights due diligence processes


There are two sets of criteria which can be applied, depending on the amount of the applicant’s exporting activity.

UK-based exporters

Applicants must pass an Exporter Test which is the requirement that either:


  export sales represent at least 20% of its annual turnover in any one of the last three financial years


or:


  export sales represent at least 5% of its annual turnover in each of the last three financial years


In addition, the exporter must be carrying on business in the UK, either by manufacturing goods in the UK, delivering services from the UK or providing intangibles from the UK. The exporter must have both premises and employees in the UK.

Future exporters

Companies that do not pass the Exporter Test (including those operating overseas who plan to develop exports from the UK) can apply if within 3 to 5 years, 10% of their turnover will be from UK exports.

Applicants will be required to submit a business plan to demonstrate how UKEF support would lead to the exporting of goods, services, or intangibles. Applicants currently carrying on business overseas will have to commit to set up, operate from, and employ staff in the UK which should be demonstrated in the business plan.


Cost

The premium payable for our cover is determined on a case by case basis.


Guidance for companies transitioning out of fossil fuel exports


If your organisation is involved in the fossil fuel sector and is looking to transition into clean energy, learn about the support we can provide with our Export Development Guarantee.


How to apply


To find out more about a UKEF Export Development Guarantee or to discuss eligibility for our support, contact our customer services team.

Contact customer.service@ukexportfinance.gov.uk or call +44 (0)20 7271 8010.


Application process

All applicants, regardless of their sector, must complete a Revenue Threshold Test which will determine whether we can provide support, as well as an application form. Applicants who do not yet export from the UK must also submit a business plan demonstrating how they intend to grow their exports.


  Export Development Guarantee application form (PDF, 293KB, 25 pages)
  Guidance on the Revenue Threshold Test


More information


  Read our guide for applicants on business processes and factors, to find out how we make decisions on applications
  Read our position on Financial Crime Compliance



Clean growth exports are defined as goods, services or intangibles relating to:


  renewable energy
  energy efficiency
  pollution prevention and control
  environmentally sustainable management of living natural resources and land use
  terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity conservation
  clean transportation; sustainable water and wastewater management
  climate change adaptation
  eco-efficient and/or circular economy adapted products, production technologies and processes
  green buildings as defined in the Green Bond Principles






      
        
    Published 21 July 2020
    Last updated 8 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 July 2021
              Two updates: a new section has been included regarding fossil fuel exports, and the EDG application form has been amended.
            
            
              21 July 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Guidance for companies transitioning out of fossil fuel exports: Applying for an Export Development Guarantee
        Processes and factors in UK Export Finance consideration of applications
        General Export Facility
        Export Insurance Policy
        UK Export Finance: success stories

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Export finance

  


  

  


    
  


    