
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Nuclear Industry Aqueous Waste Management Good Practice Guidance
  

  
  

  
    
  The Aqueous Waste Management Good Practice Guide details the principles, processes and practices during the management of aqueous effluent that is contaminated, or potentially contaminated, with radioactivity.  

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Nuclear Decommissioning Authority

      
      Published
      26 May 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Aqueous Waste Management Good Practice
    
        PDF, 2.85MB, 242 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@nda.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Good Practice Guide (GPG) addresses the importance of developing an appropriate aqueous effluent management solution; undertaking effective characterisation and monitoring; applying the waste hierarchy; selecting appropriate technologies for the management of aqueous effluent; selecting appropriate discharge and disposal routes; and considering the whole waste management lifecycle.

The GPG was written for staff involved in the management of aqueous waste on nuclear sites with varying knowledge, experiences and backgrounds. The GPG was produced with the support of the nuclear industry and involved a series of workshops (with participants from waste owners, producers, receivers and regulators) to support its development. Nuclear site operators are not required to follow the guidance, although it is recommended to do so.



        
      

      
    Published 26 May 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Business and the environment

  


  

  


    
  


    