
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Performance analyst
  

  
  
  
      
  Find out what a performance analyst does and the skills you need to do the job.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      7 January 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Introduction to the role of performance analyst

        
        
          Associate performance analyst

        
        
          Performance analyst

        
        
          Senior performance analyst

        
        
          Lead performance analyst

        
        
          Head of performance analysis

        
        
          Read more

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
This describes the role of a performance analyst and the skills required, including:


  an introduction to the role, telling you what you would do in this role and the full list of skills
  a description of the levels in this role, from associate performance analyst to head of performance analysis, specifying the skills you need for each level and the corresponding skill level (awareness, working, practitioner, expert)


This role is part of the Digital, Data and Technology Profession in the Civil Service.

Introduction to the role of performance analyst

A performance analyst conducts analysis. In this role, you will develop performance measurement frameworks - key performance indicators (KPIs), goals, user needs and benefits - and analyse the performance of a service or product against these, adapting your approach and framework appropriately and in line with any changes.

Skills required to be a performance analyst

You will need the following skills for this role, although the level of expertise for each will vary, depending on the role level.


  
Communicating analysis and insight. You know how to use the most appropriate medium to visualise data to tell compelling and actionable stories relevant for business goals. You can present, communicate and disseminate analysis and recommendations effectively, appropriately and with high impact.
  
Performance measurement. You know how to enable the team to develop a performance framework including KPIs or a service or product. You can provide the intelligence to support the formulation of both short-term and long-term strategic plans. You can identify and analyse options, and assess their feasibility and operational impact. You can ensure that business solutions are aligned with strategy, business goals and end user needs.
  
Technical understanding (performance analyst). You stay abreast of industry developments so that you make cost-effective use of new and emerging tools and technologies. You keep up to date with advances in digital analytics tools and data manipulation products.
  
Understanding analysis across the product life cycle. You understand the different phases of product delivery and can plan and run the analysis for these. You can contribute to decision-making throughout the product life cycle. You can work in collaboration with user researchers, developers and other roles throughout the product life cycle. You understand the value of analysis, how to contribute with impact, and what data sources, analytical techniques and tools can be used at each point throughout the product life cycle.
  
Understanding constraints (performance analyst). You understand and can work within given constraints (including but not limited to technology, policy, regulatory, financial, legal, ethical, social, user constraints). You feel comfortable challenging constraints that can be changed. You know how to ensure compliance against constraints by adapting products and services where needed with a particular focus on data security and privacy concepts including data protection.
  
Undertaking analysis and providing insight. You can turn data into valuable insights that inform decisions. You have an understanding of analytical tools; you are numerate. You know how to collect, collate, cleanse and interpret data to derive meaningful and actionable insights. You can identify and apply the most appropriate analytical techniques to bring different sources together to tell a story. You know how to involve teams in analytics to increase consensus and challenge assumptions.
  
User-centred analysis. You understand and can identify who users are and what their needs are, based on evidence. You put users first and can manage competing priorities. You understand the importance of analysis to user-centred design and know how to collaborate with professions that are focused on user-centred design (for example, user research, user experience, content, design, business analysis). You can act as a voice of the internal user and end user and can bring together data from varying sources to ensure that all members of agile delivery teams have access to actionable insights.
  
Verification and validation of data and analysis. You know about quality assurance techniques including those used by other analytical professions. You can identify the right data sources and then validate and understand how to interpret the results. You know how to ensure that data is fit for purpose.


Associate performance analyst

An associate performance analyst is a numerate entry-level role for those with some experience in analysis or data handling. At this level, you should:


  have the aptitude to learn to use analytical tools and produce standardised reports and charts
  start by working on projects with limited scope under the guidance of performance analysts and more senior role levels, replicating existing analysis and data techniques
  progress to greater independence (where appropriate)
  have the opportunity to develop an understanding of the wider analytics context, tools and techniques
  be responsible for the accuracy and quality of data and analysis, and how they are used
  engage with the performance analysis community


Skills needed for this role


  
Communicating analysis and insight. You understand the appropriate media to communicate findings. You can shape and share communications relevant to the audience. You can give tactical recommendations. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Performance measurement. You know about the importance of performance measurement and the business objectives. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Technical understanding (performance analyst). You know about analytical tools and technologies and can use some of them. You know about digital technology and have an understanding of what it involves and its impact. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Understanding analysis across the product life cycle. You can describe the importance of performance measures, their relation to business objectives and how they vary at different stages of the product life cycle. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Understanding constraints (performance analyst). You know about ethical and operational constraints. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Undertaking analysis and providing insight. You understand and can work with colleagues to apply core techniques for analysis and insight. You know how to present clear insights that colleagues can understand and use. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
User-centred analysis. You know that everything we do is focused on the user of the product or service. (Relevant skill level: awareness)
  
Verification and validation of data and analysis. You understand basic data issues and can check that the data and analysis look right. You understand the concept of data being fit for purpose. You understand the context of the data. You know the right questions to ask; you are curious; you adopt an analytical mindset when approaching a problem. You can perform data preparation and cleansing with guidance. (Relevant skill level: awareness)


Performance analyst

A performance analyst has a strong understanding of a wide range of sources and analytical tools needed for the project they are working on. At this level, you:


  are responsible for the performance analysis in your given area and help the project team measure and assess outcomes: for example, what good looks like and how it will be measured
  help to plan and ensure project delivery, finding opportunities to share information with the project team, community colleagues and others
  work independently, although you know to seek guidance when necessary
  are adaptable in applying analysis techniques to new contexts, especially when acting as the sole representative for performance analysts on a project
  are able to create a performance measurement framework for a project with the wider team, including identifying reporting requirements, advising on procurement, implementation and validation of tools to deliver against these requirements
  are responsible for the accuracy and quality of data and analysis and how they are used
  are engaged with, and actively contribute to, the performance analysis community


Skills needed for this role


  
Communicating analysis and insight. You understand the appropriate media to communicate findings. You can shape and share communications relevant to the audience. You can give tactical recommendations. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Performance measurement. You can participate in discussions determining which performance measurements are appropriate, with guidance from more experienced colleagues. You have experience in turning business needs and goals into performance measures. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Technical understanding (performance analyst). You understand the core technical concepts related to the role and can apply them. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Understanding analysis across the product life cycle. You understand how the needs of the team and product vary across the product life cycle. You can ensure the team is measuring performance as appropriate for the relevant service standard phase. You can manage the delivery of services or products at different phases. You know how to plan ahead and look at data requirements in future phases. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Understanding constraints (performance analyst). You can identify constraints and understand them and can communicate these and work within them. You can challenge the validity of constraints. You know how to ensure that standards are being met. You have an understanding of security and data privacy. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Undertaking analysis and providing insight. You understand and can help teams apply a range of techniques to analyse data and provide insight. You are proactive and can present compelling findings that inform wider decisions. You know how to apply innovative approaches to resolve problems. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
User-centred analysis. You can use quantitative and qualitative data about users to turn user focus into outcomes. You know how to deliver analysis and information that addresses stakeholder needs and provides recommendations. You are comfortable collaborating with user researchers and other user-focused professions. You know how to guide others on approaches to understand user stories. (Relevant skill level: working)
  
Verification and validation of data and analysis. You recognise and identify appropriate ways to collect, collate and prepare data, and can decide if data is accurate and fit for purpose. You know how to perform data preparation and cleansing with limited guidance. (Relevant skill level: working)


Senior performance analyst

A senior performance analyst looks to delegate, automate or up-skill others in analysis where possible and appropriate, provide leadership within their team and proactively use analysis to improve services. At this level, you:


  may manage one or more performance analysts
  are proficient in a wide range of tools and ensure that the team is equipped with the required skills according to the strategy set out by the head of performance analysis
  are skilled and experienced at carrying out the day-to-day activities of a performance analyst, including setting up performance measurement frameworks, while also carrying out increasingly complex analysis working with other teams where necessary
  actively contribute to the performance analysis community within their department or organisation, while forging links with other analytical disciplines


Technical specialist

As a technical specialist senior performance analyst, you would look to develop tools and techniques to aid others in analysis. You will be responsible for the accuracy and quality of data, analysis and how these are used.

Skills needed for this role


  
Communicating analysis and insight. You can turn complex data into compelling, clear and actionable stories. You know how to share data communication skills with the team and across government. You can present analysis and visualisations in clear ways to communicate complex messages. You can communicate negative and positive information to stakeholders. You know how to give tactical and strategic recommendations. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Performance measurement. You can lead on the development of performance measurement frameworks including key performance indicators (KPIs). You have a deep understanding of business goals and can turn these into tangible performance measures. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Technical understanding (performance analyst). You have a deep understanding of the technical concepts required for the role and understand how these fit into the wider technical landscape. You understand the limitations of digital technology. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Understanding analysis across the product life cycle. You can apply experience of multiple parts of the product life cycle. You can recognise when to move forward and when to stop. You know how to recognise the appropriate deliverables and engage the right people to meet these. You can work with other agile delivery disciplines throughout the product life cycle. You can plan and proactively engage with stakeholders at the appropriate stage of the project. You can identify which tools and techniques should be used at each stage. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Understanding constraints (performance analyst). You can work with and challenge senior stakeholders. You can prioritise and mitigate constraints and can turn them into an advantage. You can adapt the approach according to constraints. You have a good knowledge of security and data privacy. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Undertaking analysis and providing insight. You understand and can help teams apply a range of techniques to analyse data and provide insight. You are proactive and can present compelling findings that inform wider decisions. You know how to apply innovative approaches to resolve problems. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
User-centred analysis. You understand the difference between user needs and desires of the user. You have experience in meeting user needs across a variety of channels. You can integrate digital analytics with qualitative data, such as user surveys and user research, to develop hypotheses for testing. You can offer recommendations on the best tools and methods to be used. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
Verification and validation of data and analysis. You know how to set up a system to get data ready for use and specify how data should be cleansed and prepared. You can bring data together from different sources and communicate the limitations of data. You know how to peer-review colleagues’ outputs to ensure quality. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)


Lead performance analyst

A lead performance analyst manages junior performance analysts at any level, coordinating teams or groups of related analysts. At this level, you will:


  assist, take forward and influence the strategy as determined by the head of performance analysis, including data implementation and data architecture
  remove blockers and act as an escalation point for important issues
  be an ambassador for analytics across communities, departments and government
  be responsible for the accuracy and quality of data, analysis and how they are used
  proactively share knowledge and promote a data-driven culture as a leader in the community
  coach and mentor senior performance analysts, performance analysts and associate performance analysts


Skills needed for this role


  
Communicating analysis and insight. You can communicate relevant, compelling stories using the most appropriate medium. You know how to give complex recommendations at a tactical and strategic level. You can present analysis and visualisations in clear ways to communicate complex messages. You know how to communicate negative and positive information to stakeholders. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Performance measurement. You know how to oversee the development and consistency of performance measurement frameworks across multiple projects. You can ensure that these frameworks are aligned to business needs and strategy. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Technical understanding (performance analyst). You can exploit opportunities through the recognition of new digital technologies to enhance analytical capability in alignment with business goals. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Understanding analysis across the product life cycle. You know how to develop sustainable support models. You can identify and deal with potential risks across or between all stages of the product life cycle. You can coach others. You know how to contribute to the assessment of other teams, providing guidance and support as they move through the stages of the product life cycle. You can lead and champion best practice, and identify improvements to current approaches. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Understanding constraints (performance analyst). You know how to influence, challenge and coach others. You can anticipate how constraints might change and know where to challenge or remove constraints. You have a very strong knowledge of security and data privacy. You can describe and work within environmental constraints, finding the most appropriate solution for users. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Undertaking analysis and providing insight. You understand and can teach and supervise a wide range of analysis techniques. You can help organisations create and learn from strategic insights. You can apply innovative approaches to resolve problems. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
User-centred analysis. You know how to give direction on which tools or methods to use. You can bring insight and expertise to how user needs have changed over time and ensure these are met. You know how to apply strategic thinking to the problem of how to provide the best service for the end user. You can consider the political strategy and implications of any analyses and insights. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Verification and validation of data and analysis. You have a deep understanding of relevant data sources, tools and systems. You know how to use appropriate approaches for verifying and validating data and analysis. You can influence senior stakeholders over data approaches. You know how to coach and mentor others. (Relevant skill level: expert)


Head of performance analysis

The head of performance analysis leads the performance analysis community, acting as the point of contact between the community and the business. At this level, you will:


  remove blockers and act as an escalation point for important issues
  set the performance analysis strategy with input from lead and senior performance analysts
  be responsible for defining a framework for quality assurance within performance analysis
  champion performance analysis and performance analysts, working with colleagues across government and other digital, data and technology (DDaT) communities and analytical professions
  manage the organisation’s performance analysis capability through business planning, development and recruitment


Skills needed for this role


  
Communicating analysis and insight. You can communicate relevant, compelling stories using the most appropriate medium. You know how to give complex recommendations at a tactical and strategic level. You can present analysis and visualisations in clear ways to communicate complex messages. You know how to communicate negative and positive information to stakeholders. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Performance measurement. You know how to oversee the development and consistency of performance measurement frameworks across multiple projects. You can ensure that these frameworks are aligned to business needs and strategy. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Technical understanding (performance analyst). You can exploit opportunities through the recognition of new digital technologies to enhance analytical capability in alignment with business goals. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Understanding analysis across the product life cycle. You can develop sustainable support models. You can identify and deal with potential risks across or between all stages of the product life cycle. You know how to coach others. You can contribute to the assessment of other teams, providing guidance and support as they move through the product life cycle phases. You can lead and champion best practice, and identify improvements to current approaches. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Understanding constraints (performance analyst). You know how to influence, challenge and coach others. You can anticipate how constraints might change and know where to challenge or remove constraints. You have a very strong knowledge of security and data privacy. You can describe and work within environmental constraints, finding the most appropriate solution for users. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Undertaking analysis and providing insight. You understand and can help teams apply a range of techniques to analyse data and provide insight. You are proactive and can present compelling findings that inform wider decisions. You know how to apply innovative approaches to resolve problems. (Relevant skill level: practitioner)
  
User-centred analysis. You know how to give direction on which tools or methods to use. You can bring insight and expertise to how user needs have changed over time and ensure these are met. You know how to apply strategic thinking to the problem of how to provide the best service for the end user. You can consider the political strategy and implications of any analyses and insights. (Relevant skill level: expert)
  
Verification and validation of data and analysis. You have a deep understanding of relevant data sources, tools and systems. You know how to use appropriate approaches for verifying and validating data and analysis. You can influence senior stakeholders over data approaches. You know how to coach and mentor others. (Relevant skill level: expert)


Read more


  Civil Service Jobs
  Read about the government’s performance analysis community
  Read about measuring success in government
  Blog: setting up a performance framework for the UK Parliament website





      
        
    Published 7 January 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Software developer
        Programme delivery manager
        IT service manager
        Test engineer
        Data architect

  




      

    Collection

  


        Digital, Data and Technology Profession Capability Framework

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    