
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Share, reuse and collaborate
  

  
  
  
      
  Avoid duplicating effort and unnecessary costs by collaborating across government and sharing and reusing technology, data, and services.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Central Digital and Data Office

      
      Published
      6 November 2017
      Last updated
      
        31 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Benefits of sharing and reusing

        
        
          How to share technology and collaborate across government

        
        
          How you can reuse technology

        
        
          Related guides

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
To meet Point 8 of the Technology Code of Practice (TCoP) your plans must show you’ve considered whether your project or programme can share and reuse technology.

If you’re going through the spend control process you must explain how you’re trying to meet point 8.


The Central Digital and Data Office is currently collecting feedback on the Technology Code of Practice. The aim is to improve the content and make sure it meets user needs. If you want to add your feedback, please complete this short survey.


Benefits of sharing and reusing

Before you start your technology project or programme, consider whether sharing your work could benefit other teams in your organisation, or other government organisations.

By sharing your work you can benefit from:


  easier collaboration with other organisations
  a larger pool of experts who can help you find solutions to any issues more quickly
  more integration between government technologies


By reusing existing technology you can benefit from:


  avoiding duplication and unnecessary spending
  speeding up initial project or programme phases
  better value for money


How to share technology and collaborate across government

It’s easier and cheaper to plan how you will share your technology solution from the start of your project or programme. Clear documentation will help your project or programme, and make it easier for you to share your work.

There are several ways you can work in the open and share your technology, data, and services.

Communities

There are communities in a variety of channels, such as Knowledge Hub, Google Groups and Slack. You will need to create a free account to join. Examples of the cross-government communities you can join include the:


  
technology communities listed in the Service Manual
  
technical architecture community (Knowledge Hub)
  
cloud working group (Knowledge Hub)
  
cloud office productivity service community (Knowledge Hub)
  
API community (email address for Google group)
  
Design System community - where you can share and contribute service design patterns


You can join these communities to explore which emerging and mature technologies other organisations are using before you commit resources to a project or programme.

Government APIs

The API technical and data standards and API design guidance can help your organisation provide data for government services in a consistent and shareable way. You can also use or contribute to the government’s API catalogue.

Combine requirements with other government organisations

Crown Commercial Service (CCS) provides information about current and future opportunities to combine buying requirements when purchasing technology.

This service is free and you:


  could increase your savings
  can use the customer team for support and advice
  can join procurements run by CCS that combine buying requirements for everyday items such as audio conferencing and WAN connectivity


How you can reuse technology

There are several technology resources and common government platforms available to all government organisations. These will help you to reuse government services, information, data and software components.

Government platforms

Consider using common government platforms and services where appropriate. These include:


  
GOV.UK Notify for user notifications
  
GOV.UK Pay for payments
  
GOV.UK Platform as a Service for hosting


Common technology

Common technology guidance and services include:


  Securing government email
  Set up government email services securely
  Protect domains that do not send email
  Sharing workplace wireless networks
  How to install network infrastructure in shared buildings
  Connect to GovWifi
  Set up GovWifi in your organisation


Government code

You should publish your code in the open and use open source technology. Some examples of open government code include:


  the Ministry of Justice’s GitHub page

  the Government Digital Service’s GOV.UK Frontend

  the Home Office Design System repository which includes forms for reuse

  the Government Digital Service’s source code

  the Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs GitHub account

  
GCHQ’s GitHub account which includes tools for data storage, processing and analysis



Next: Technology Code of Practice point 9 - Integrate and adapt technology


Related guides


  Government technology standards and guidance





      
        
    Published 6 November 2017
    Last updated 31 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 March 2021
              Addition of a temporary research survey to get user feedback on the Technology Code of Practice.
            
            
              22 May 2019
              Restructure and clarification of content. Some link updates and changes.
            
            
              6 November 2017
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Open Source guidance
        Make privacy integral
        Hackney Council’s approach to moving to a cloud-first model from the PSN
        Manage your data for access and reuse
        Integrate and adapt technology

  


  









  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    