
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Expert witnesses in legal aid cases
  

  
  
  
      
  Guidance about expert witnesses in cases funded by legal aid, including fees, prior authority and provisions for specific types of expert. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Legal Aid Agency

      
      Published
      1 July 2014
      Last updated
      
        22 September 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Fees for expert witnesses

        
        
          Forensic science laboratory charges in criminal matters

        
        
          Clinical negligence experts

        
        
          Risk assessment experts

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Fees for expert witnesses

Read guidance about expert witness fees, including:


  maximum rates for different types of expert witness
  how to apply for prior authority, including benchmarks for working ‘unusual’ hours
  expert activity time guidelines
  expert witness standards in family matters
  arrangements for specific expert types, including independent social workers, experts in risk assessment, drug and alcohol testing and DNA testing



  
      
  
  
    Expert witness fee guide
    
        PDF, 515KB, 34 pages
    


  


Forensic science laboratory charges in criminal matters

The Legal Aid Agency (LAA) has published guidance on the funding of forensic science laboratory charges in criminal matters.

The guidance sets out that appropriate charges levied upon the defence by prosecution forensic science laboratories may be payable by the LAA where the LAA considers the charge to be reasonable and has granted prior authority to incur the cost.

The guidance provides a list of activities that must not be claimed from the LAA. It also explains that payment for such services will be made in line with the Criminal Legal Aid (Remuneration)(Amendment) Regulations 2013.


  
      
  
  
    Guidance on forensic science laboratory charges in criminal matters
    
        PDF, 60.5KB, 2 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email web.comments@justice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  


Clinical negligence experts

Ministry of Justice (MoJ) has confirmed that these rates will generally be acceptable as a starting point when an expert provides specialised and unusual evidence in a cerebral palsy case, and their evidence is key to the client’s case:


  
    
      Expert
      Rate
    
  
  
    
      Neurologist
      £200 per hour
    
    
      Neonatologist
      £180 per hour
    
    
      Neuroradiologist
      £180 per hour
    
  


You must have a good reason if you want to pay these experts more.


  
      
  
  
    Clinical negligence expert fee guide
    
        PDF, 111KB, 4 pages
    


  


Risk assessment experts

You may need a specialist risk assessment expert if:


  the court order specifies a risk assessment
  the work to be done is over and above that requiring independent social work expertise (eg where there’s a conviction or pending proceedings for a sex offence, or where a finding of sexual abuse relevant to the case has been made by a court)
  the report is specifically required to address the risk posed as a result of the above factors



  
      
  
  
    Risk assessment expert fee guide
    
        PDF, 115KB, 4 pages
    


  






      
        
    Published 1 July 2014
    Last updated 22 September 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              22 September 2020
              Version 6 of the Expert Witness Fee Guide published.
            
            
              1 April 2019
              An updated version of the Guidance on the Remuneration of Expert Witnesses is published.
            
            
              5 September 2014
              Guidance on fees for expert witnesses updated.
            
            
              21 August 2014
              The Legal Aid Agency has published guidance on the funding of forensic science laboratory charges in criminal matters.
            
            
              1 July 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Appeals: civil means
        Appeals: civil merits
        Project Completion Report Synthesis 1998 (ev619s)
        WN4 0EJ, S E D Services Limited: environmental permit issued
        Business Statements: Office of the Leader of the House of Commons, April 2017

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Civil

  


  

  


    
  


    