
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Lord Ferrers Awards 2020 and 2021
  

  
  

  
    
  The Lord Ferrers Awards recognise outstanding contributions to volunteering in policing.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      1 June 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Lord Ferrers Awards 2020 and 2021: nominations guidance
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The full list of award categories is set out below:


  
    
      Ferrers Special Constabulary - Individual Award
      Open to individual Special Constables who have demonstrated a sustained and significant contribution to policing in their local communities.
    
    
      Ferrers Special Constabulary – Team Award
      Open to teams of Special Constables who have demonstrated a sustained and significant contribution to policing in their local communities.
    
    
      Police Support Volunteer – Individual Award
      Open to individual Police Support Volunteers who have demonstrated a sustained and significant contribution to policing in their local communities.
    
    
      Police Support Volunteer – Team Award
      Open to teams of Police Support Volunteers who have worked together to make a significant and sustained contribution to policing in their local communities.
    
    
      Volunteer Police Cadet – Individual Award
      Open to individual Volunteer Police Cadets who have demonstrated a significant and sustained contribution to Youth Led Social Action in support of policing and/or their communities.
    
    
      Volunteer Police Cadet – Team Award
      Open to teams of Volunteer Police Cadets who have worked together to make a significant and sustained contribution to Youth Led Social Action in support of policing and/or their communities.
    
    
      Employer Supported Policing Award
      Open to organisations that support their local police force through facilitating their employees to volunteer in policing. The award recognises the contribution of employers and includes those accredited under the Community Safety Accreditation Scheme.
    
    
      Leadership Award
      Open to individual Special Constables who have demonstrated a significant and sustained contribution to leadership.
    
    
      Technical Innovation Award – Individual or Team
      Open to Special Constables, Police Support Volunteers, Volunteer Police Cadets or any other volunteer involved in policing.  The award recognises the contribution volunteers can bring to using technology to support policing.
    
    
      Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner (OPCC) Volunteer – Individual or Team
      Open to OPCC volunteers who have demonstrated a significant and sustained contribution to policing in their local communities.
    
    
      Volunteering in Partnership Award – Individual or Team
      Open to Special Constables, Police Support Volunteers, Volunteer Police Cadets or any other volunteer involved in policing. This award recognises volunteers who have demonstrated a significant and positive contribution to working with others in partnership for the benefit of their communities.
    
  





        
      

      
    Published 1 June 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Policing

  


  

  


    
  


    