
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Apply for free or subsidised training under the BEIS Skills Training Competition scheme
  

  
  
  
      
  Tradespeople can get training in home energy retrofitting and low carbon heat insulation.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      16 February 2021
      Last updated
      
        9 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who the training is for

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Training providers

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Tradespeople can apply for free or subsidised training in home energy retrofitting and low carbon heat installation.

The training is designed to get tradespeople professionally trained to deliver the government’s current and future energy efficiency schemes. These include:


  Local Authority Delivery (LAD) scheme
  Green Homes Grant scheme
  Energy Company Obligation (ECO)
  Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund (SHDF)
  Sustainable Warmth competition


The training is being given by various training providers across England.

Who the training is for

The training is for tradespeople or businesses who install energy efficient measures (such as solid wall insulation) or low-carbon heating measures (such as heat pumps).

How to apply

There are 18 training providers to choose from, offering a range of different training packages. Visit the training provider’s website for specific eligibility requirements and how to apply.

Training providers


BESA Academy

The training covers domestic heat pumps.

BESA will provide training to upskill 700 currently qualified plumbing and heating engineers to correctly install and maintain domestic heat pumps.

Training will be available until 31 October 2021.

Training can be undertaken online and at a number of training centres in England.


Sign up for training on the BESA Academy website.


Building Our Skills Academy Limited

The training covers non-insulation fabric measures.

Attendees to the programme will undergo 3 days of training. At the end of the training, attendees will be competent to fit windows and doors, glaze and re-glaze existing windows and doors, and have a full understanding of the site requirements and building regulations that impact the trade.

View a full course prospectus.

Training will be available until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the Building Our Skills Academy website


Dudley College

Dudley College is offering training in both heat pumps and solar thermal as well as heating and hot water controls.

Courses in heat pumps and solar thermal include:


  National Inspection Council for Electrical Installation Contracting (NICEIC) heat pumps and solar thermal (national occupational standards (NOS) aligned)
  
NICEIC solar thermal (NOS aligned)
  City and Guilds F Gas


The Heating and Water Controls training package consists of:


  Hot Water Systems and Safety Certificate of Competence
  S & Y plan wiring
  installing smart technology
  wiring regulations 2382 City and Guilds


Training will be available until September 2021.


For enquiries please contact:

Nigel Sidwell (Construction Commercial Training Manager)
Email: nigel.sideell@dudleycol.ac.uk
Phone: 07917346759


Sally Conroy (GHG Co-ordinator)
Email: sallyconroy@dudleycol.ac.uk
Phone: 07776 591503


Elmhurst Energy

The training covers retrofit assessor training and accreditation.

Elmhurst is providing retrofit assessor training and accreditation for professionals accredited as Domestic Energy Assessors. The training is delivered online.

Learn more about the training.

The training is available until 30 September 2021.


There are 3 training courses available. You can sign up to each of them on Elmhurst Energy’s website:


  retrofit assessor training
  retrofit coordinator training
  training if you are unemployed



Eco Academy (from Expedient Training)

The training covers:


  retrofit assessor training
  insulation
  non-insulation fabric measures


The training will help attendees gain the compliance that is required to meet the standards for PAS 2030:2019. Gaining certification for PAS 2030:2019 is a prerequisite to install measures under the Green Homes Grant scheme.

The training will run until September 2021.


Sign up for training on the Eco Academy website


Farnborough College of Technology

The training covers:


  insulation
  heat pumps and solar thermal
  heating and hot water controls


The training will help installers achieve various LCL awards, including:


  LCL L3 Award in Energy Efficiency for Gas Fired and oil-fired Domestic Heating and Hot Water Systems
  LCL L3 Award in the Installation, Commissioning and Maintenance of Wood Pellet Burning Appliances
  LCL L3 Award in the Installation and Maintenance of Heat Pump Systems (Non-refrigerant Circuits)


The training will run until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the Farnborough College of Technology website


The Green Register

The training covers:


  retrofit assessor and retrofit coordinator training
  insulation
  non-insulation fabric measures
  heat pumps and solar thermal
  heating and hot water controls


One hundred funded places are offered to businesses wishing to undertake retrofit training, certify in PAS:2030 and become TrustMark registered. A further 200 retrofit training places are available for contractors from the same company, alongside 50 discounted training places for contractors who are currently unemployed.

The training will run until 31 July 2021.


Sign up for training on the Green Register website.


Greendale Ltd trading as Ecta

The training covers heat pumps and solar thermal green technologies.

The training is available until 31 October 2021.


To apply, contact Kaya Walmsley for further information on routes and training packages available:

Email: kaya@ectatraining.co.uk
Phone: 0161 480 5656


GTEC MCS


The training covers:


  solar thermal
  heat pumps (air source and ground source)
  biomass


The training is for existing plumbing and heating contractors. Up to 70% of funding to cover the training costs and certification will be made available.

The training is available until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the GTEC MCS website


Hampshire Training and Assessments

The training covers heating and hot water controls.

Training will be given for the following qualifications:


  Hot Water Systems and Safety
  Level 3 Award in Energy Efficiency for Gas Fired and Oil-Fired Domestic Heating and Hot Water Systems
  Essential Electrics and Safe Isolation of Electrical Equipment



Sign up for training on the Hampshire Training & Assessments website


Heat Geek

The training covers:


  heat pumps and solar thermal
  heating and hot water controls


Subsided training is available for up to 300 applicants. The training is broken up into 2 courses - ‘Awakening’ which teaches the fundamentals of heating design and ‘Mastery’ which goes deeper into hydronic understanding and theory.

The training is available until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the Heat Geek website


North West Skills Academy

The training covers:


  insulation
  non-insulation fabric measures


This training will provide installers with City & Guilds Level 2 NVQ qualifications in Insulation and Building Treatments.

The training is available until 30 July 2021.


Sign up for training on the North West Skills Academy website


Optimum Energy Solutions

The training covers:


  heat loss calculations and surveys
  heat pump theory and installation
  solar Thermal fundamentals
  gaining MCS accreditation and TrustMark registration


The course is held online over 4 days (3 days online), with the fourth day comprising a final face-to-face presentation of heat pump equipment and systems to be held at various locations.

The training is available until 30 April 2021.


Sign up for training on the Optimum website


Provincial Seals

This training covers insulation, including measures such as cavity wall, loft and underfloor insulation.

The course will help installers achieve a Level 2 NVQ in Insulation and Building Treatments.

The training is available until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the Provincial Seals website


The Retrofit Academy

The training covers:


  retrofit coordinators (applications now closed)
  retrofit assessors


The course will help installers achieve the NOCN Level 2 Award in Understanding Domestic Retrofit. This qualification provides an entry-point that can be counted towards an NVQ.

The training must be completed by 31 October 2021..


Sign up for the course on the Retrofit Academy website.


Think Construction Skills

The training covers insulation.

The course will help installers achieve a Level 2 NVQ in Insulation and Building Treatments, specialising in measures such as external wall, cavity wall and cold roof insulation.

The training is available until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the Think Construction Skills website


Trade Engine

The training covers:


  insulation
  non-insulation fabric measures
  heat pumps and solar thermal
  heating and hot water controls


The training will help installers achieve PAS 2030 or MCS certification. This includes providing quality management systems, training, and certification support.

The training is available until 31 October 2021.


Sign up for training on the Trade Engine website


Windhager

The training covers the installation of biomass appliances.

This direct entry course is available for existing installers and HETAS registrants who wish to expand their skills and branch out into the installation of biomass and batch-fed appliances. It is also suitable for existing HETAS registrants who wish to attain the skills necessary to install biomass boiler appliances.

The training is available until 18 June 2021.


Sign up for training on the Windhager website






      
        
    Published 16 February 2021
    Last updated 9 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              9 July 2021
              The training is now applicable for all of the government's energy efficiency schemes, including the Local Authority Delivery scheme and the Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund.
            
            
              23 April 2021
              Added details about training offered by Dudley College.
            
            
              16 February 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund Demonstrator – successful bids
        Home Energy Performance Retrofit: funding for local authorities and housing associations to help improve the energy performance of homes
        Getting a Green Deal: information for householders and landlords

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Household energy

  


  

  


    
  


    