Inform and Inspire the Next Generation SeriesPart I: U.S. Spotlight on K-12 Nuclear Science Curriculum Initiatives and STEM Engagement July 21, 2020 - 10:00 am - 11:30 am EDTWe invite you to this multi-country series spotlighting successful youth outreach initiatives. This webinar is sponsored by the American Nuclear Society (ANS), the Clean Energy Ministerial (CEM) Nuclear Innovation: Clean Energy Future (NICE Future) initiative, the CEM Clean Energy Education and Empowerment (C3E) initiative, and the International Youth Nuclear Congress (IYNC). The webinar series showcases educational activities that inspire the next generation to explore energy solutions, including nuclear energy technologies, for clean, reliable, resilient, and integrated systems. This webinar presents new ways experts are growing the next generation of young minds with innovative approaches to STEM education. Starting with a discussion of successful new programs in the United States, the webinar will preview upcoming webinars in the series focusing on other countries. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) will set the stage with a global perspective by discussing resources and national approaches available to nuclear newcomer countries.  Next, our C3E speaker will highlight ongoing efforts to advance gender diversity in clean energy professions.  We will then turn to our U.S. focus story, “Navigating Nuclear:  Energizing our World.” This platform is brought to us by ANS and Discovery Education, with support of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Nuclear Energy (DOE/NE).  Navigating Nuclear provides educators with dynamic, standards-aligned tools to dig deeper into the role of nuclear science in fields like power generation, medicine, space exploration, food preservation, molecular science, and more. Observe an interactive suite of FREE classroom resources, such as a virtual visit to Idaho National Laboratory (INL).Learn how these initiatives engage educators and students, setting the stage for enhanced professional development for educators in nuclear energy-related studies. Initiatives at INL and DOE/NE will also be discussed.   The CEM Opportunity and Countries’ InvolvementCurriculum Discovery: Spotlighting the United States 