The following is the text of a joint statement by the Energy Ministries of the Governments of France and the United States of America.Minister Barbara Pompili of the French Ministry for the Ecological Transition and Secretary Jennifer M. Granholm of the United States Department of Energy issued a joint statement today:France and the United States share common goals and common resolve in fighting climate change and working towards reaching the ambitious target set forth by the Paris agreement. Our ministries, the French Ministry for the Ecological Transition and the U.S. Department of Energy, are moving with urgency to mitigate the current climate crisis by leveraging cutting-edge research and science to dramatically accelerate the deployment of energy technologies, breakthrough innovations, and policies that will provide a cleaner, safer, and more prosperous future. We are united in a common ambition on both sides of the Atlantic: achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. Reaching this common objective will require leveraging all currently existing emission-free technologies available to us while simultaneously intensifying research, development, and deployment across a suite of zero-emissions energy sources and systems.  Ensuring that these energy systems are efficient and reliable, integrating larger shares of renewables coupled with nuclear energy, which is a significant part of today’s electricity production in both our countries, will be crucial to accelerate energy transitions.  Reaching this common objective will also require a wide variety of favorable financing conditions across the range of zero-emitting power sources and systems.   In this respect, France and the United States commit to work together on new technologies and the ongoing energy transition in order to contribute significantly to zero-carbon generation solutions. Decarbonized and innovative electricity systems, which may include innovative nuclear energy technologies or new designs, such as small modular, micro, and other advanced reactors, will contribute to an expansion of renewable energy, support rural electrification, produce hydrogen to decarbonize transportation and other energy sectors, help provide drinking water to water stressed regions, and support a range of cleaner industrial applications.We are committed to turning the threat posed by climate change into an opportunity to revitalize the energy sector and to pioneer clean industries and technologies. Our ministries and industries are innovating advanced decarbonized energy technologies in multiple sectors, including long-duration storage, advanced transportation, smart energy systems, carbon capture utilization and storage, and advanced nuclear. All are contributing significantly to zero-carbon generation solutions and it is our firm belief that the clean energy transition will boost high-paying, long-term jobs that hire locally, employ a diverse workforce, and lift up whole communities. states that; “In order to reach the ambitious target set forth by the Paris agreement and tackle effectively the climate change issue, the world’s leading economies must gather their strengths and technological assets to bring innovative zero-carbon solutions. With the United States, we aim to build international momentum on these aspects with the perspective of the upcoming COP26.” affirms that; “As leading innovators, the United States and France are taking intensified action toward an irreversible path to a net-zero economy by 2050. We urgently need to bring innovative solutions that can be deployed around the world, leveraging all of our zero-emitting generation technologies, like nuclear, renewable energy and CCUS.” ###