
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Woodhill Prison
  

  
  
  
      
  Woodhill is a men’s high security prison and young offender institution (YOI) in Milton Keynes. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service and Ministry of Justice

      
      Published
      2 June 2020
      Last updated
      
        24 August 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Book and plan your visit to Woodhill

        
        
          Keep in touch with someone at Woodhill

        
        
          Send money and gifts

        
        
          Life at Woodhill

        
        
          Support for family and friends

        
        
          Problems and complaints

        
        
          Contact Woodhill

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.


Book and plan your visit to Woodhill


Woodhill prison is now offering visits for family, friends and significant others, in line with stage 2 of the National Framework for Prisons.

Find out more about visiting someone in prison during the COVID-19 pandemic. You can also follow @HMPPS on Twitter and read a rolling update page.

We are now allowing physical contact at social visits following a negative rapid test. Find out more here.

There are a number of other ways to contact someone in prison if you are unable to visit them.

You can also contact the Prisoners’ Families Helpline on 0808 808 2003. You will not be able to book a visit using this number.


To visit someone in Woodhill you must:


  be on that person’s visitor list
  book your visit in advance
  have the required ID with you when you go


A maximum of 3 people aged 18 or older can visit at one time, plus children. At least one visitor must be 18 or older at every visit.

Prisoners can have one weekend visit and two weekday visits a month plus additional visits depending on their privilege level.

Call the visits booking line on 01908 722 329 if you have any questions about visiting.

Help with the cost of your visit
If you get certain benefits or have an NHS health certificate, you might be able to get help with the costs of your visit, including:


  travel to Woodhill
  somewhere to stay overnight
  meals


How to book family and friends visits

Woodhill is running a limited visits schedule. Visits are also running differently than normal, observing strict guidelines, which must be followed.

You can book your visit by telephone. There is no online booking service available.

Visits booking line: 01908 722 329
The booking line is open Monday to Friday: 8am to 11:30am and 1pm to 3:30pm
Find out about call charges

Visiting times:


  Monday: 9:30am to 10:30am and 2:15pm to 3:15pm
  Tuesday: 9:30am to 10:30am and 2:15pm to 3:15pm
  Wednesday: 9:30am to 10:30am
  Thursday: 9:30am to 10:30am and 2:15pm to 3:15pm
  Friday: 9:30am to 10:30am and 2:15pm to 3:15pm


You will not be admitted if you arrive later than 30 minutes after the start of the visit.

How to book legal and professional visits

Request a legal visits form from: legalvisits.woodhill@justice.gov.uk

Visiting times:


  Monday: 9:45am to 11:15am, 2:15pm to 3:45pm


Getting to Woodhill
Find Woodhill on a map

The closest railway station is Milton Keynes Central, which is about 2.5 miles from Woodhill. Local buses run from the station to the prison.

To plan your journey by public transport:


  use National Rail Enquiries

  use Traveline for local bus times



There is a visitors car park including space for Blue Badge holders.

Entering Woodhill
All visitors, aged 16 or older must prove their identity before entering the prison.  Read the list of acceptable forms of ID when visiting a prison.

All visitors will need to be given a pat-down search, including children. You may also be sniffed by security dogs.

Woodhill has a family-friendly dress code which means visitors should dress appropriately. You may be turned away if you are wearing items like cropped or low-cut tops, high-cut shorts or dresses, ripped jeans or see-through clothing. Additionally, you cannot wear cargo or combat trousers, slippers, steel toe-capped footwear or anything with offensive patterns or slogans. You will need to remove scarves, gloves, watches, excessive jewellery, large buckles, chains and hats (except religious head coverings) before you go in. Ask in the visitors centre if you have questions about the dress code.

There will be no refreshments available during your visit.

There are strict controls on what you can take into Woodhill. You will have to leave most of the things you have with you in a locker in the visitors centre which takes £1 coins. This includes pushchairs and car seats.

You will be told the rules by an officer at the start of your visit. If you break the rules, your visit could be cancelled and you could be banned from visiting again.

Visiting facilities
There is a visitors centre run by the Prison Advice and Care Trust (PACT). Family and friends can relax, buy refreshments and get advice and support from the staff.

Opening hours:


  Tuesday to Thursday: midday to 4:45pm
  Saturday: 8:15am to 11:30am, midday to 4:45pm
  Sunday: 12:30pm to 16:45pm


Telephone: 01908 722 242
Find out about call charges

Family visits
There are currently no family days being run.

Keep in touch with someone at Woodhill
There are several ways you can keep in touch with a prisoner during their time at Woodhill.

Phone calls
Prisoners have phones in their rooms which they can use at set times:


  6am to 8am
  9am to 1pm
  2pm to 11pm


The phones do not accept incoming calls so prisoners will always have to call you. They have to buy phone credits to do this.

They can phone anyone named on their list of friends and family. This list is checked by security when they first arrive so it may take a few days before they are able to call.

You can also exchange voicemails using the Prison Voicemail service.

Officers may listen to phone calls as a way of preventing crime and helping keep people safe.

Secure video calls
Secure video calling is available at this prison. Family and friends need to download the purple visits app, create an account, register all visitors, and add the prisoner to their contact list.

Read more about how it works

Email
You can send emails to someone in Woodhill using the Email a Prisoner service.

You might also be able to attach photos and receive replies from the prisoner, depending on the rules at Woodhill.

Letters
You can write at any time.

Include the person’s name and prisoner number on the envelope.

If you do not know their prisoner number, contact Woodhill.

All post, apart from legal letters, will be opened and checked by officers.

Send money and gifts

You can use the free and fast online service to send money to someone in prison.

You can no longer send money by bank transfer, cheque, postal order or send cash by post.

If you cannot use the online service, you may be able to apply for an exemption - for example if you:


  are unable to use a computer, a smart phone or the internet
  do not have a debit card


This will allow you to send money by post.

Gifts and parcels
It’s not possible to send items or property to prisoners. You can send prisoners money instead which they can use to buy items through a catalogue system.

Family and friends of prisoners are permitted to send books directly to their loved ones, or can order books from approved retailers, which can source and send the books on to prisoners.
 
For the full list of approved retailers, you can read the HMPPS Incentives Policy, Annex F.

Life at Woodhill
Woodhill is committed to providing a safe and educational environment where men convicted of serious offences can make positive use of long sentences.

Security and safeguarding
Every person at Woodhill has a right to feel safe. The staff are responsible for their safeguarding and welfare at all times.

All safeguarding processes are overseen by the Milton Keynes Safeguarding Board.

Arrival and first night
When a prisoner first arrives at Woodhill, they will be able to contact a family member by phone. This could be quite late in the evening, depending on the time they arrive.

They will get to speak to someone who will check how they’re feeling and ask about any immediate health and wellbeing needs.

Induction
Each person who arrives at Woodhill gets an induction that lasts 5 days. They will meet professionals who will help them with:


  health and wellbeing, including mental and sexual health
  any substance misuse issues, including drugs and alcohol
  personal development in custody and on release, including skills, education and training
  other support (sometimes called ‘interventions’), such as managing difficult emotions


Everyone also finds out about the rules, fire safety, and how things like calls and visits work.

Accommodation
Around 800 men live at Woodhill in a mixture of single and shared rooms. All rooms have phones for outgoing calls.

Education and work
Prisoners have access to a broad programme of learning opportunities designed around their employment goals. Subjects include:


  English
  maths
  painting and decorating
  multi-skills
  catering
  music technology


Work is available throughout the prison, along with the chance to study and earn professional qualifications. Areas include:


  contract workshop
  laundry
  waste management
  garden party
  market garden
  kitchens


Prisoners can also take up mentoring positions to assist others with their learning.

Temporary release
Prisoners may qualify for release on temporary licence. This can be used to gain work experience in the local community and prepare for release. Prisoners can apply for this within the prison.

Support for family and friends
Find out about advice and helplines for family and friends.

Support at Woodhill
The PACT team provides a range of information, guidance and support to families and friends of prisoners. More information is available on the PACT website.

You can also get help from the Woodhill chaplaincy team when you need to have a difficult conversation or give bad news to a prisoner. Contact Woodhill on the main number and ask to speak to the chaplaincy.

Problems and complaints
If you have a problem contact Woodhill. If you cannot resolve the problem directly, you can make a complaint to HM Prison and Probation Service.

HM Prison and Probation Service publishes action plans for Woodhill in response to independent inspections.

Contact Woodhill
Governor: Nicola Marfleet

Telephone: 01908 722 000
Fax: 01908 722 320
Find out about call charges

Follow Woodhill on Twitter

Address


HMP/YOI Woodhill
Tattenhoe Street
Milton Keynes
Buckinghamshire
MK4 4DA



See map

Safer custody hotline
If you have concerns about the safety or wellbeing of a man in Woodhill, call the urgent concern line to speak to the safer custody team. Out of hours, your call will be forwarded to the control room where you can ask to speak to the orderly officer.

Telephone: 01908 722 152
Find out about call charges


Help us to improve this page. Give us your feedback in this 2-minutes survey.






      
        
    Published 2 June 2020
    Last updated 24 August 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              24 August 2021
              Added link to information about testing for physical contact at visits.
            
            
              25 May 2021
              New visiting times and booking information added.
            
            
              30 April 2021
              Prison moved into National Stage 3 framework and is now preparing to open visits for family, friends and significant others. We will update this page with specific visiting information as soon as possible.
            
            
              21 December 2020
              Visits update
            
            
              4 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              2 December 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new local restriction tiers.
            
            
              6 November 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with new national restrictions in England.
            
            
              5 October 2020
              Updated visiting information in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              11 August 2020
              Updated visiting times and visiting procedure changes in line with coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              6 August 2020
              Added confirmation of secure video calls made available at this prison.
            
            
              2 June 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Gartree Prison
        Hollesley Bay Prison
        Huntercombe Prison
        Long Lartin Prison
        Portland Prison and Young Offender Institution

      
        
          + 2 more
        
      

      
        
          Prison life and Staying in touch with someone in prison
        
      
  




      

    Collection

  


        Prisons in England and Wales

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Prisons and probation

  


  

  


    
  


    