As society struggles to step up to the challenges posed by the climate change freight train and its impacts on health, safety, the economy and the environment, every possible solution is on the table. While we already have the technology to transition away from burning fossil fuels, the cause of rapid climate change, some scientists and wealthy donors doubt that we will do so. For that reason, we are seeing more frequent  in efforts to mask the effects of global warming until the problem can be solved. First among these is what is known as solar geoengineering.Solar geoengineering is a misnomer used to describe efforts to reduce the amount of solar energy reaching the lower atmosphere and thereby counteract the greenhouse effect that has led to rapid climate change. Such projects are , in science and non-science circles, for three main reasons.1) Tinkering with the atmosphere is what got us into this climate crisis in the first place, and is seen as fraught with menacing uncertainties about impacts to very complicated global atmospheric and hydrologic systems. Some scientists argue that this is why it must be researched, .2) Solar geoengineering will affect some regions and populations differently than others, with dramatic implications for vulnerable economies. Some areas already threatened by unending drought or extreme heat may see more of the same or worse, while other areas may be slightly cooled. This raises obvious social justice concerns. Some scientists argue that this is another reason to study these methods. Yet others, understanding the social risks but not equity or the state of global finance, have suggested the creation of a  to compensate those parties.3) Opponents of this type of research argue that even preliminary research into such extreme measures could be used by fossil fuel interests, and society at large, to justify continued greenhouse gas emissions. This tendency is illustrated in recent efforts on the part of fossil fuel companies like  to describe nonexistent technologies, such as carbon capture, as effective means to increasingly offset, and therefore allow, some of their emissions....