It’s the eighth year of the   and it’s been a blockbuster:  FT journalists filtered through a record-breaking entry of some 600 books to produce a longlist of 15 for the panel of judges to read.“The longlist was full of books whose topics and insights were very much likely to stand the test of time, a key determinant for success with this annual award,” said , publisher, global publishing at McKinsey, and one of nine members of this year’s jury. “It has meant a wonderful summer of reading, followed by a very spirited discussion with fellow judges in what is always a fun yet difficult task of winnowing that list down.”The shortlist of six was announced at a virtual event co-hosted by , editor of the FT, and , the managing partner for our UK, Ireland, and Israel offices.“While the continuing impact of the pandemic is reflected in the books that made the list, the breadth and richness of topics here underscores the forward-looking value of this annual book award,” Virginia said at the event. “These authors provide compelling and engaging insights into modern business, climate change conversations and our sustainable and inclusive future, setting up a compelling shortlist for the jury to then select a winner, by year-end.”In addition to Roula Khalaf, who chairs the group, this year’s panel of judges includes: Mimi Alemayehou, senior vice-president for public-private partnerships at Mastercard’s humanitarian and development group; Mitchell Baker, chief executive, Mozilla Corporation; Mohamed El-Erian, president, Queens’ College, Cambridge, and adviser to Allianz and Gramercy; Herminia Ibarra, professor of organizational behavior, London Business School; James Kondo, chair, International House of Japan; Randall Kroszner, professor of economics and deputy dean for executive programs at University of Chicago’s Booth School of Business; Raju Narisetti; and Shriti Vadera, chair, Prudential.The winner of the award will be announced and presented with a £30,000 prize  in London on December 1; runners up will receive £10,000.Here are quick looks at some of the year’s best business reading:
Adrian WooldridgeMeritocracy—the idea of people advancing based on their talents rather than social standing—should get another look.  In this book, Woolridge traces the history of meritocracy and how it has transformed social mobility for women. The book proposes that meritocracy is a catalyst that could help rebalance the social, economic and racial inequality of today's world.
Robert LivingstonLivingston has helped corporations, police departments, hospitals, universities, and  government agencies address racism within their organizations. In his first book—a powerful combination of storytelling, social research, and a pragmatic five-step process—he helps readers develop fact-based perspectives that can lead to insight and increased empathy.
Patrick Radden KeefeThis book, according to the FT, “explores the links between the Sackler family and the global epidemic of opioid addiction through the rise and fall of Purdue Pharma, a company owned by two of the Sackler brothers and their families.”
Michael E. MannClimate change denialists are turning into “inactivists,” saying it’s up to individuals to reduce carbon emissions with the right diets, cars, and habits. While personal responsibility can help, Mann, a climate scientist, spotlights the real issue: the urgent need for unequivocal macro-strategies to de-carbonize our economies.
Nicole PerlrothStolen elections. Poisoned water. Nuclear meltdowns. Cybersecurity reporter Nicole Perlroth lays out the untold story of the global cyberweapons market—and where the US stands today, including its strengths, weaknesses, and potential risks and outcomes, offering a sober look at a new kind of warfare.
Javier Blas, Jack FarchyTwo leading journalists offer an inside look at the world of commodity traders who buy and sell the Earth’s natural resources: oil, cotton, sugar, and more.  In a series of eye-opening anecdotes, the authors detail how a few traders in private firms wielded incredible power in less scrutinized corners of the globe, often with questionable political and social results.