
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pathways: Data Visualisation
  

  
  
  
      
  Government Analysis Function Learning Pathways, highlighting a route through learning focusing on data visualisation.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Analysis Function

      
      Published
      1 November 2021
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Data Visualisation

        
        
          Persona

        
        
          Summary

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          


Analysis Function Learning Pathways: Data Visualisation


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Description

Data visualisation is an interdisciplinary field that deals with the graphic representation of data. Visualising data makes it easier to spot trends, patterns, interpret results and speeds up the decision-making process. The data visualisation pathway provides you with a strong conceptual understanding of principles surrounding designing tables and graph to effectively communicate your results using industry standard tools and technologies.

Learning Objectives


  Describe the basic design principles that can be applied to communicate with your audience.
  Understand the best practices while producing visual aids to analyse, understand and publish data.
  Demonstrate the ability to use different tools and techniques to produce data visualisations while following government guidelines.


Length

This pathway contains three courses.

Persona

To help decide if this is the pathway for you, this learning persona is designed to create a realistic representation of the intended learning audience.



General Background

Teo works in a non-technical role within recruitment.

Starting Point

Teo handles a large amount of data which is instrumental to making decisions about productivity and headcount. They have attended Introduction to R and are keen to use this in their working practices.

Perceived Needs

Teo needs to communicate with a diverse audience and needs a way to cascade information that is easily understood by all. Teo has used other tools but is keen to apply the knowledge gained from attending introduction to R.

Special Considerations

Teo prefers trainer-led sessions to self-study as this helps them continue even when the training gets difficult.

Summary

The data visualisation pathway provides you with a strong conceptual understanding of principles surrounding designing tables and graph to effectively communicate your results using industry standard tools and technologies.


You can find learning to help you follow this pathway on the Learning Hub.  If you don’t already have an account, contact GSS.Capability@statistics.gov.uk to request log in details.


Back to Analytical Learning Pathways page.




      
        
    Published 1 November 2021



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Pathways: Text Analysis
        Pathways: Data Wrangling
        Pathways: Statistical Analysis
        Pathways: Communicating Insight
        Pathways: Data Quality

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporate information

  


  

  


    
  


    