What  do  some of  the best-known  tech  giants  have  in  common?  They  are,  of course,  all  phenomenally successful,  paradigm-redefining  companies,  boasting massive  market  valuations  and  continuous  growth.  They  are  all  also  platform-based  organizations  that  owe  much  of their  success  to  the  agility with which they are  able  to  innovate  and  reconfigure  themselves  to  go  after  new  opportunities with  apparent  shape-shifting  ease. At the  16th  annual  McKinsey  Technology  IT  conference,  leading  CIOs  discussed how they  are  driving  to  allow  their  companies  to  be tech  forward—that  is,  use technology  to  drive  new  value.  The  participants  quickly moved  past  the well-known aspects  of  platforms  to  focus on  the  key insight:  the value  of  platforms  comes  from  linking  them  to  the  business  strategy  and having  a holistic understanding  of  how  all  their  elements  have to  work  together.Participants  represented  a  range of  industries,  including  banking,  automobile manufacturing,  pharmaceuticals,  airlines,  and retail—a  diverse group  united  by an  interest  in  the  potential  of  platforms.  Some have  already  pulled  off  stunning transformations.  An Asian bank,  for  example,  has  effectively  reinvented  itself  as the  world’s  leading  digital  bank,  a senior  adviser  told us.  It  no  longer  compares itself  to  other  banks  but  views  itself  more as  a  30,000-person  tech  start-up, unifying  business  and  technology.Yet  despite the  consensus  around  the importance of  platforms,  conference presentations  and  discussions  underscored that  companies  that  integrate platforms  into  their  enterprise architecture  are  doing  so  in  notably  different ways.  Three  broad  paradigms  for  platform transformation  emerged,  with  the most  successful  companies,  like the tech  giants,  combining  elements  of  all  three.The  first  category of  platform  transformation  involves reshaping  the  business model  to  leverage platform  elements  by  within  an  industry or across  traditional  industry  borders  or  by  setting  up marketplaces  connecting customers  and  providers.  A banking  CIO  emphasized the  need to  focus  on  the customer  journey  as  a  point of departure  in  the  transformation  to  a  platform-based  model.  He described  how  his  company  built  an  ecosystem  of  partners integrated  into  their  banking  offering,  consciously  choosing  partners  so  that “we’re not  perceived  as  a  banking  brand,  but  as  a  lifestyle brand.” A consumer-goods  retailer  has  begun  to  implement  a  platform-based  model  as  it transitions  from  a  bricks-and-mortar  business  to  one that  is  data  driven.  Its  CIO demonstrated  how  the company  has  achieved  this  in  a  competitive  and  highly saturated  market  by  offering  customers  more  local,  simple,  and  digital  solutions through  artificial-intelligence  personalization.  Its  flexible  app platform  enables the  delivery of  value  to  both  the  customer  and  the  business.  A  feature  on  the platform  showed  that  users who  selected  a  “prepaid”  option  were generating significantly  higher  sales.  “So  we now  offer  a  rebate to  customers using  this feature,”  he  told  us,  which  benefits  both  customer  and  retailer.In other  cases,  platform transformation involves  reorganizing  IT  (and  business stakeholders) around  a  set of modular  platforms,  each  with  its  own  logical  cluster of  activities  and associated technology  delivering  on  a specific  business goal.  This approach  reimagines  the role of  technology  in  business  and views  platforms  not just  as a  technology but  as  a service.Platform ,  starting  with  top  engineering  talent,  are essential  to  a  successful  transformation  to  a  modular  platform  model.  A  global pharmaceutical  company  has  established a  specialized career  path  for  engineers separate  from  the  rest of the  company’s  HR  infrastructure.  As  its  CTO  put it, great  engineers  “want  to  write code,  not  approve vacation  requests.”  A  leading bank  has  also  taken  measures  to  protect its  supply  of top  talent.  It  screens  and recruits  talent  in-house  instead  of outsourcing  this  crucial  function  to  external recruiters.  “We need  to  be better  than  them;  otherwise,  our  competitors  can  also hire  our  talent,”  one  of  its  leaders  told us.An airline  has  achieved  the  ambitious  target  of  fully  digitizing  its  customer experience  by  driving  business-model  and tech  transformation  simultaneously.  It took  measures  to  protect its  platform  model  from  the legacy  business.  The new team,  or  “digital  embryo,”  is  based  in  a  separate building,  close enough  to headquarters  to  attend  meetings  but,  as  the  CIO  told  us,  “far  enough  so we  avoid constantly  eating  lunch  together  with  colleagues  who  might deflect  us  from  our goal  of  radically  rethinking  all  elements  of  business  and  technology.”Finally,  a  platform transformation typically  builds  on technology  platforms,  the  for  digital  innovation.  Several  participants  told us  how  they had  first “cleaned  up”  their  IT  architecture to  serve as  a  foundation  for  digital  innovations. A leading  pharmaceutical  company  prepared  the  ground for  its  transformation  by implementing  a  ruthless  platform  strategy  with  six  target platforms  and  the  goal of  reducing  the  number  of  applications  from  4,000 to  1,000.  There has  been  a  sharp  increase over  the  past  two  years  in  companies  embracing platform transformations,  and  as  the  number  continues  to  grow,  the scope of what that means  will  continue  to  broaden.Whichever  aspects  of  platforms  are  relevant,  the  discussions  underscored that  all of  the  decisions  around platforms  at  any  company  are  tech  driven  and interconnected  and  will  require a  comprehensive strategic  approach  that  involves the entire company’s  enterprise architecture.