
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Use the Patent Box to reduce your Corporation Tax on profits
  

  
  
  
      
  Check if your company can pay a reduced rate of 10% Corporate Tax if it exploits patented inventions and innovations.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      1 January 2007
      Last updated
      
        7 May 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who can benefit

        
        
          What makes a patent eligible

        
        
          Exclusively licensing-in patents

        
        
          Income from exploiting patented inventions

        
        
          Calculation examples

        
        
          Answers to your Patent Box questions

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The Patent Box is designed to encourage companies to keep and commercialise intellectual property in the UK. It allows companies to apply a lower rate of Corporation Tax to profits earned from its patented inventions.

Companies  must elect into the Patent Box to apply the lower rate of Corporation Tax which is 10%. This relief was  introduced in phases from 2013 up until 2017.

This guidance only refers to patents.  but if your company holds certain other medicinal or botanic innovation rights it can also take advantage of Patent Box benefits.

Who can benefit

You can only use the Patent Box if your company:


  is liable to Corporation Tax
  makes a profit from exploiting patented inventions
  owns or has exclusively licenced-in the patents
  has undertaken qualifying development on the patents


If you elected to the Patent Box after 30 June 2016

After this date benefits are restricted if your company


  incurred expenditure in acquiring the patents
  made payments to connected parties for their research and development (R&D) expenditure


The R&D fraction shows how much this affects the calculation.

What makes a patent eligible

To benefit from the Patent Box your company must own or exclusively licence-in patents granted by:


  the UK Intellectual Property Office
  the European Patent Office
  these countries in the European Economic Area:
    
      Austria
      Bulgaria
      Czech Republic
      Denmark
      Estonia
      Finland
      Germany
      Hungary
      Poland
      Portugal
      Romania
      Slovakia
      Sweden
    
  


Your company (or another group company) must also have undertaken qualifying development for the patent. It must have made a significant contribution to either:


  the creation or development of the patented invention
  a product incorporating the patented invention


Groups of companies

If your company is a member of a group, it must:


  
actively own the patented invention
  take a significant role in managing its whole portfolio of eligible patents


Exclusively licensing-in patents
Patent holders may wish to licence their inventions for others to develop.

If your company holds licences to use others’ patented technology it may use the Patent Box if it meets all the following conditions. The licensee must have:


  rights to develop, exploit and defend rights in the patented invention
  one or more rights to the exclusion of all other persons (including the licensor)
  exclusivity throughout an entire national territory (rights to manufacture or sell in part of a country would not qualify)


The licencee must meet one of these conditions:


  be able to bring infringement proceedings to defend its rights
  be entitled to the majority of damages awarded in successful proceedings relating to its rights


When a group company may hold an exclusive licence

Within a group, one company in the group may own a portfolio of patents while others exploit them. You may treat a group company as holding an exclusive licence if:


  it has been granted exclusive rights within an entire national territory
  no one else has these rights (including the licensor or the group intellectual property holding company)


The group company does not need to have the rights to enforce, assign or grant a licence for these rights.

Income from exploiting patented inventions

Identify profits from intellectual property

Not all of your company profits may come from exploiting patented inventions. To class profits as intellectual property income, they must come from at least one of the following activities:


  Selling patented products including:
    
      the patented product
      products incorporating the patented invention
      bespoke spare parts
    
  
  licensing out patent rights
  selling patented rights
  infringement income
  damages, insurance or other compensation related to patent rights


Companies in the manufacturing and service sectors can generate qualifying income for the Patent Box if they:


  manufacture using a patented process
  provide a service using a patented tool


In these circumstances a notional royalty can be treated as income from intellectual property.

Identify which profits to enter into the Patent Box

To identify profits to enter in the Patent Box, separate relevant intellectual property income from other income.

You can do this by streaming income if your company:


  elected in after 30 June 2016
  had new patents after 30 June 2016
  is in the Patent Box from 1 July 2021


Elect into the Patent Box

You have to make an election to benefit from the reduced rate of Corporation Tax that applies to the Patent Box.  This must be done
 within 2 years after the end of the accounting period in which the relevant profits and income arose. You can make an election:


  in the computations accompanying your Company Tax Return
  separately in writing.


There is no special form of words for this election and no box on the Corporation Tax return.

Patent Box calculation steps

The calculation steps create a deduction which reduces the profits so that the reduced rate of 10% is applied to the relevant profits.

View a summary of the Patent Box calculation steps using streaming.

To help you work through the steps to take within that calculation use the Patent Box decision tree.

Remember that the R&D fraction will be 1 and Patent Box deductions unrestricted if:


  there are no acquisition costs
  all the research and development is undertaken within the company or by third party subcontractors


Calculation examples

View an example of the Patent Box calculation.

The calculation’s complexity will depend on the number and type of patented products. This will vary between different businesses and sectors.

Answers to your Patent Box questions

There is a  Specialist Incentive and Relief team which can help you with Patent Box questions. You can contact them,  putting Patent Box as the subject of the email:


  before making a claim
  while you are putting together your claim


If HMRC Large Business  handles your company’s tax affairs, you should contact your customer compliance manager.

Read further guidance on The Patent Box

UK Intellectual Property Office




      
        
    Published 1 January 2007
    Last updated 7 May 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 May 2020
              We have updated Corporation Tax relief rules for those electing to the Patent Box after 30 June 2016, and links to supporting information.
            
            
              1 January 2007
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        British manufacturing: supporting a world leader
        Corporation Tax relief on goodwill and relevant assets
        Guidelines on the meaning of research and development for tax purposes
        Research and Development tax relief
        Restriction of corporation tax relief for business goodwill amortisation
        Corporation Tax rates and reliefs

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Corporation Tax

  


  

  


    
  


    