
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Industrial Fuel Switching competition
  

  
  

  
    
  The competition is looking for projects that will help industry switch to lower carbon fuels. Applications for Phase 1 (Feasibility Studies) are now closed.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      17 August 2021
      Last updated
      
        16 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Industrial Fuel Switching Competition: Phase 1 competition guidance notes
    
        PDF, 786 KB, 121 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Changes made to guidance notes and application form from 29 October
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Industrial Fuel Switching Competition: Phase 1 questions and answers
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Project cost breakdown finance form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 109 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    GDPR declaration form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 103 KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Slides from Industrial Fuel Switching Innovation competition launch on 12 October 2021.
    
        PDF, 1.17 MB, 44 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The £55 million Industrial Fuel Switching competition will support innovation in the development of pre-commercial fuel switch and fuel switch enabling technology for the industrial sector, to help industry switch from high to lower carbon fuels. Funding will be awarded through Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI) contracts, providing 100% funding for pre-commercial solutions.

There are 2 phases to the competition:


  
Phase 1 – Feasibility: funding for feasibility studies into fuel switch and fuel switch enabling solutions, with £50,000 to £300,000 available per application
  
Phase 2 – Demonstration: funding for projects to demonstrate fuel switch and fuel switch enabling solutions, with £1 million to £6 million available per project


The competition will support fuel switch and fuel switch enabling technologies at Technology Readiness (TRL) Level 4 to 7 at the start of the project.

Funding is divided into 3 Lots:


  fuel switch and fuel switch enabling technologies for hydrogen.
  fuel switch and fuel switch enabling technologies for electrification
  fuel switch and fuel switch enabling technologies for biomass, wastes, and other net zero compatible fuels


Phase 1 (Feasibility) is now closed to applicants.

Phase 2 (Demonstration Projects) will open in late 2022 to all applicants, whether or not they have taken part in Phase 1.



        
      

      
    Published 17 August 2021
    Last updated 16 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              16 December 2021
              Applications for Phase 1 (Feasibility Studies) are now closed.
            
            
              29 October 2021
              We have updated the guidance document and the application form. The maximum number of applications per lead organisation has increased from 1 to 3, across all Lots. We have published a document outlining other changes that have been made. We have also published answers to questions that were submitted.
            
            
              20 October 2021
              Added slides from the Industrial Fuel Switching Innovation competition launch on 12 October 2021.
            
            
              11 October 2021
              Phase 1 of the competition is now open to applications.
            
            
              5 October 2021
              The registration form for this competition is now available. You need to register in order to be able to apply to the competition. The competition opens to applications on 11 October 2021.
            
            
              28 September 2021
              Online competition launch event to be held on 12 October 2021: details and registration link added.
            
            
              17 August 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Direct Air Capture and other Greenhouse Gas Removal technologies competition
        Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply Competition (closed)
        Alternative Energy Markets, Energy Price Signals Study: contract awarded
        Industrial Fuel Switching Competition (closed)
        Register your interest for Phase 3 of the Industrial Energy Efficiency Accelerator

  




      

    Collection

  


        Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon technologies

  


  

  


    
  


    