
        
        
        
     is the first of a series of annual status reports on the digital maturity and infrastructure of German healthcare. Drawing on 30 indicators, our two-part report analyzes where Germany’s healthcare system currently stands in digital infrastructure, supply and demand for digital services among healthcare providers, and the appetite for digital healthcare among patients (see sidebar, “Notes on methodology”). We also outline the quantitative benefits that e-health has delivered to date by reviewing the latest medical literature, and we examine the obstacles and opportunities for the increased adoption of telemedicine.
        


    
    In the past two years, Germany’s healthcare system has made a lot of progress, driving forward the legislative framework for the digitization of healthcare—especially in electronic patient records, telemedicine, and e-prescriptions. That work was urgently needed in view of Bertelsmann Stiftung’s 2018 Digital Health Index ranking, which placed Germany second to last among 17 countries.


 Germany has also played a pioneering role in e-health: it was the world’s first country to establish a combined regulatory and reimbursement process for digital e-health applications (“apps on prescription”).
        


    
    Results from the recent survey of healthcare players and experts by the German Managed Care Association (BMC) supplement this report (see sidebar, “BMC Innovation Panel Survey”). We also include outside perspectives: insights from a virtual-roundtable discussion on the outlook for telemedicine and an article featuring the Federal Ministry of Health’s outlook on the future of e-health in Germany.Part one: German e-health—insights and analysisThe first part of the report provides its most important insights on e-health in Germany. It focuses on four core areas: technical infrastructure and digital maturity, digital supply and demand, the acceptance and use of digital healthcare solutions by patients, and the benefits of e-health as documented in the literature.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
Part two: Focus on telemedicineThe nascent market for telemedicine has exploded as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and might well serve as a role model in the digitization of healthcare. All of the second part of eHealth Monitor 2020 is therefore devoted to telemedicine.
	
The main article looks at the evolution of telemedicine over the past few years and explores its significance in the German healthcare system. Our conclusion: in Germany, telemedicine services (such as video consultations) are still a long way from crossing the finish line. To reach it, the country must, first of all, provide financial incentives and regulatory support for telemedicine and, second, expand the digital infrastructure and improve interoperability. In a guest feature, Ulrich von Rath, an internist and general-medicine practitioner, reports that “Telemedicine makes sense because it enriches the care we provide.” He offers insights into the use of telemedicine in a medical practice and shows what will be needed to drive digitization in outpatient settings.In a virtual-roundtable discussion, three telemedicine providers—Katharina Jünger from TeleClinic, Claudia Linke from Zava, and Florian Weiß from jameda—share their perspectives on where telemedicine is headed and what might speed up its expansion. They believe that the future of medical-care delivery in Germany will be “blended care”: a hybrid of digital and in-person visits. However, for that to happen, telemedicine must be embedded deep in the national health ecosystem.The eHealth Monitor 2020 report closes with the outlook of the Federal Ministry of Health on the future of e-health in Germany. This article covers what has been achieved to date from the ministry’s perspective and what must happen to facilitate the broader provision of digital healthcare in Germany. First and foremost, this will mean opening up the healthcare system to innovation, the development of a comprehensive communications network with the electronic patient record as a central platform, and the creation of a European Health Data Space


 for the fair processing and use of healthcare data.Download the  in German.