
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED: Leeds City Region – Digital Skills Programme (OC20S19P1691)                                                                                                                                 
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project to provide digital skills training to employed individuals and graduates in Leeds City Region, up-skilling the workforce and supporting business productivity.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      14 November 2019
      Last updated
      
        10 February 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Learning and skills
      Location: 
      Yorkshire and Humber
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      6 February 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Details

        
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Details

Proposals are sought for the development and delivery of digital skills training (including skills required for Industry 4 roll out) to employed individuals in SMEs across key sectors. The proposed services must deliver a responsive skills programme that is tailored to the needs of the Leeds City Region LEP area in order to stimulate a growth in the digital skills base for businesses that will give the best opportunity to grow the economy and create more and better jobs.

The services must deliver highly responsive skills provision to meet business and industry needs. Employers must be engaged to shape and direct the services. In Leeds City Region, the services must be aligned with the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) projects Digital Enterprise and the Superfast West Yorkshire programme which aim to develop ICT products and services, ecommerce, enhancing demand for ICT, supporting the capacity of SMEs to grow in regional, national and international markets and to engage in innovation processes and maximise SME competitiveness through increased uptake of superfast broadband and more efficient use of digital technologies.

This call covers the breadth of digital skills needed set out above.

All activities must complement and avoid duplication with other provision, thereby adding value to Department for Work and Pensions/National Lottery Community Fund, Education and Skills Funding Agency, local authority, National Careers Service and the new Careers Enterprise Company funded provision.  Successful candidates will be required to ensure that ESF provision will clearly add value and not duplicate any provision that can be arranged locally through existing mainstream institutions.

For more information, download the call specification.

Location

The project must cover the Leeds City Region LEP area.

Value

Approximately £2,000,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines

Full application deadline: 06 February 2020.

Completion date

Projects must be completed no later than 3 years and 6 months after the proposed project start date, however the ESF Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.  All ESF Projects must be completed by 31st December 2023.  Project costs cannot be incurred beyond this date.

Full Application Submission

To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.


Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.


It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from our homepage.
The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. ESF Online Full Application Guidance.

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details

If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.




      

      
        
    Published 14 November 2019
    Last updated 10 February 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              10 February 2020
              Leeds City Region – Digital Skills Programme (OC20S19P1691) project call is now closed.
            
            
              14 November 2019
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    