
      



  
    


      
    Statutory guidance
  

  
  
    Great crested newts: survey or research level 2 licence (CL09)
  

  
  

  
    
  Register for a licence to survey great crested newts for research, conservation or development projects.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Natural England

      
      Published
      6 October 2014
      Last updated
      
        1 October 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Register for class licence CL09 to survey great crested newts for research, conservation or development projects
    
        https://defragroup.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_1YZhKFDrs6tyxNQ
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Great crested newts: survey or research level 2 licence (CL09) 
    
        
          Ref: WML-CL09
        
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Pitfall traps: notify Natural England before use (A29-3)
    
        MS Word Document, 197KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@naturalengland.org.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Survey return form
    
        https://defragroup.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_6KYUcDYKYNLgC0u
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This licence allows you to survey great crested newts using:


  pitfall traps - you must tell Natural England before using these traps (not covered by level 1 licences)
  hand
  nets
  torches
  aquatic funnel traps (including bottle traps)


You cannot use box traps.

You must release all captured GCN as soon as you’ve finished examining them.

You must apply for an individual licence for survey, research or conservation work not covered by this licence, or a level 1 licence.

For development work affecting GCN, you must apply for a mitigation licence.

Using pitfall traps

When using pitfall traps you must:


  tell Natural England at least 5 working days before installing fences and traps using the ‘Pitfall traps: notify Natural England before use’ form (A29-3) on this page
  only use a maximum of 20 metre fence line and 15 pitfall traps per site
  avoid obstructing or significantly disrupting natural migration patterns
  not use pitfall traps over the winter
  not ring-fence ponds
  not leave fences in place for more than 20 days
  check pitfall traps at least once a day between 6am and 11am
  make sure fence and trap designs comply with guidelines


Register with Natural England

Before you can use this licence, you must register with Natural England using the application form linked on this page.

When you need to pay

It costs £80 to register for a new CL09 licence.

From October 2022, it will cost £35 to renew your registration.

You must declare the intended use of the licence on your registration form. This will determine if you need to pay, such as to survey GCN for development projects.

Natural England will refund unsuccessful applications.

Read the terms and conditions for paying for a wildlife licence.

When you do not need to pay

You do not need to pay if the licence is used for:


  voluntary purposes - any work you do is unpaid and you are registered with an organisation or charity as a volunteer
  conservation, science or research purposes - research related to the protected species is carried out by a student or employee of an academic institution or research body


How to pay

You can pay using a bank card. Follow the GOV.UK Pay link on the application form.

References

You usually need to complete a reference to support a survey or research licence form when you register for this licence if you:


  have not held a licence for the species or a similar species for the last 3 years
  have a licence but want to add new methods


Report action taken

You must complete the survey return form by  31 October each year, even if you’ve taken no action or did not find target species. You’ll need the names of any accredited agents who carried out the surveys on your behalf.

You must report your actions from 1 October to 30 September. For each site, you must record:


  survey location (10 figure Ordnance Survey grid reference and what3words

  number of surveys taken
  start and end dates of each survey
  if you found GCN eggs
  if you did not find GCN

  the highest number of juveniles or adult GCN you found
  the purpose of your survey


You must also send your results to the Local Record Centre. You can do this by recording your results on the iRecord website or contacting your local record centre.

Renew your licence

You can use the survey return form to renew your registration.




        
      

      
    Published 6 October 2014
    Last updated 1 October 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              1 October 2021
              From 1 October, you will need to pay £80 to register for a licence, unless you are exempt.
            
            
              14 September 2021
              Added 'including informing development projects' to the 'overview' paragraph of the licence.
            
            
              1 January 2021
              Annual licence update.
            
            
              17 November 2020
              Added accessible version of the licence - HTML.
            
            
              1 January 2020
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2020
            
            
              1 January 2019
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2019
            
            
              26 February 2018
              Registration form A29-1 added.
            
            
              1 January 2018
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2018
            
            
              1 January 2017
              Annual licence update 2017.
            
            
              1 January 2016
              Replaced licence with new version issued 1 January 2016.
            
            
              1 January 2015
              Added updated class licence. New version valid from 1 January to 31 December 2015.
            
            
              6 October 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Great crested newts: survey or research level 1 licence (CL08)
        Otters: apply for a mitigation licence (A45)
        Hazel dormice: survey or research - level 2 licence (CL10b)
        Natterjack toads: apply for a mitigation licence (A44)
        Great crested newts: report survey or research licence actions

  




      

    Collection

  


        Class licences for wildlife management
        Great crested newt licences

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Land species
        Reptiles and amphibians

  


  

  


    
  


    