Executives agree: The digital revolution will change the way their organizations operate. According to a McKinsey Digital Quotient survey from April 2019, 93 percent of executives believe that digital is critical to achieving their strategic goals. Even though organizations have been digitizing for decades, the digital revolution is still fairly new. Not only is the speed of technological progress often underestimated, but it is also getting increasingly faster.Key digital technologies, such as automation, artificial intelligence, advanced analytics, the Internet of Things, and augmented and virtual reality, are constantly evolving. These technologies offer more groundbreaking application areas and will increasingly be implemented throughout the entire value chain. Against this background, corporations need to fundamentally rethink their organizational setup and embed digital in their DNA in order to remain competitive and reap the benefits of emerging technological opportunities.However, few companies are set up for taking advantage of the new opportunities offered by digitization and for mastering the challenges that come with these. Nine out of 10 CEOs believe their organization is currently not ideally set up. Most companies focus on adjusting and extending their offerings to more digitally enhanced products or services. On the other hand, just as important, organizational implications are often neglected.Adjusting the organizational setup to embrace digitization drives significant improvements in the financial performance of organizations. As indicated by McKinsey’s Digital Quotient Benchmark, corporations that adopt a digital-ready setup can quadruple their five-year Revenue CAGR and almost triple their five-year Total Return to Shareholders CAGR compared to corporations that do not foster and prepare for such organizational change.In order to capture the potential of digital opportunities, organizations need to make fundamental design choices along three dimensions:An example of a European e-commerce player we served epitomizes how well a digital organization can hit the ground running, when structure, processes and people are all adequately addressed by the transformation.The extent of organizational adjustments needed to meet the requirements of digitization can differ significantly from company to company and will take some time to implement. Nevertheless, in times of the digital revolution, they are of fundamental importance in order to maintain and expand a relevant position in the market.