



Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn

Law Enforcement Approaches for Reducing Gun ViolenceBy Samuel Peterson, Shawn BushwayApril 22, 2020
Summary: Law enforcement agencies use a range of reactive and proactive strategies to respond to and prevent gun crime. While the rate of violent crimes committed with guns has declined substantially over the past 30 years, more research is needed on which approaches are most effective at reducing gun crime.The national policy discourse on ways to further reduce gun violence focuses on either enhancing existing laws or passing new laws that could prevent violent crimes committed with guns (e.g., homicides, assaults, robberies) or other forms of gun violence (e.g., fatal and nonfatal firearm suicides, gun accidents). Such policies include universal background checks, bans on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, extreme risk protection orders, concealed-carry laws, waiting periods, child-access prevention (CAP) laws, minimum age requirements, prohibitions associated with domestic violence, licensing and permitting requirements, and a host of other laws and policies covered elsewhere in RAND’s Gun Policy in America project.


Debate about new policies rarely includes explicit discussion of what law enforcement is currently doing, under existing laws, to reduce violent crimes committed with guns. However, the rate at which violent crimes are committed with guns has declined substantially over the past 30 years. For example, the homicide rate, which is dominated by crimes that involve firearms, has dropped by 50 percent since 1980, with a large portion of that drop occurring from 1993 to 2014 (James, 2018). Although it can be hard to empirically prove that law enforcement actions caused the decline, most commentators conclude that at least some of this drop was caused by the response of law enforcement (Uggen and McElrath, 2013).


In this essay, we review the range of law enforcement activities focused on enforcing laws that govern the criminal misuse of guns (e.g., illegal possession) and violent crimes committed with guns (e.g., homicides, assaults, and robberies committed with firearms). We also comment on the existing research evidence.[1]


A convenient way to structure our tour of law enforcement activities is to divide our attention between standard (or traditional) law enforcement activities and proactive strategies. Standard law enforcement approaches involve monitoring and reacting to law violations when they occur;[2] proactive approaches involve a range of activities that seek to stop crimes before they occur. Both approaches aim to prevent crime in general. We first review standard law enforcement approaches, including enforcement of existing firearm laws and regulations and the response to individual crimes involving guns (e.g., the investigation and prosecution of such crimes). We then review proactive violent crime reduction and prevention interventions, which occasionally focus on violent crimes committed with guns.[3]

Standard Law Enforcement Approaches

The standard model of policing emphasizes random patrols, rapid response to 911 calls, and investigations of reported crimes (with the arrest of the perpetrator as the likely outcome). Enforcing firearm possession laws and responding to, investigating, and prosecuting gun crimes fit under this standard model. In this approach, increasing the number of law enforcement officers is the primary way to increase performance or enforcement (Weisburd and Eck, 2004). Both local and federal law enforcement have important, but differing, roles within the standard approach in enforcing gun laws and investigating gun crimes (see table below).

Standard Law Enforcement Approaches to Address Criminal Gun Misuse and Violent Crimes Committed with Guns


Local and state law enforcement approaches
Responding to crimes involving firearms
Investigating crimes involving firearms
Enforcing laws pertaining to the transfer and handling of firearms
Federal law enforcement approaches
Handling licensing, inspections, and commerce
Tracing crime guns
Prosecuting crimes committed with guns
Investigating trafficking, terrorism, and mass violence 
Running the National Integrated Ballistic Information Network (NIBIN)
Running the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)

Regulatory and Criminal Enforcement of Ownership and Sales

Some law enforcement responsibilities listed in the table above include regulatory activities for limiting the criminal misuse of guns.[4] At the federal level, two agencies—the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)—engage in a variety of activities related to guns and gun crime, largely in the form of enforcing regulations and performing investigations. On the regulatory side, the FBI oversees the NICS, and the ATF regulates federal firearms licensees (FFLs) by processing licenses, conducting inspections, and tracking national firearm commerce. The NICS is a national resource that helps ensure that people legally excluded from purchasing a firearm are detected during a background check. In 2018 alone, more than 25 million background checks were conducted through the NICS. Meanwhile, the ATF is tasked with inspecting the 130,000 FFLs in the United States. It inspects roughly 8 percent of these FFLs per year, which results in a license revocation or surrender for roughly 1 percent of the FFLs inspected. In 2018, 42 percent of inspected FFLs were found to have no violations, 18 percent had a violation reported, 11 percent received a warning letter, and nearly 4 percent participated in a warning conference (ATF, 2019a). Local and state law enforcement agencies also engage in such state-specific regulatory activities as issuing concealed-carry permits or firearm purchase permits; they also may conduct background checks themselves.


A related function is the enforcement of criminal gun possession and trafficking laws on illegal firearm transfers, prohibited possessors, and prohibited locations. This includes ensuring that firearms are sold and handled appropriately and are owned legally. Firearms may be obtained illegally or by prohibited possessors through a variety of mechanisms; however, a firearm can go through several transactions (some of them legal) before ending up in the hands of a prohibited possessor. In surveys of offenders who committed crimes with a gun, friends and family were the most common source of the gun involved. The next most common sources were illicit sources (e.g., middlemen for stolen goods, sometimes called fences; street connections; drug dealers) and unlicensed gun stores or pawn shops (Cook, Parker, and Pollack, 2015).





The Experts Weigh In
Compare expert opinions on how gun policies may affect violent crime in your state and the U.S. as a whole. »



At the federal level, enforcement can include investigating FFLs suspected of engaging in criminal activity, investigating interstate gun trafficking, and supporting local investigations of intrastate trafficking. At the local level, this might involve enforcing laws associated with firearm storage or arresting prohibited possessors. This local enforcement of criminal gun possession laws tends to vary dramatically across jurisdictions. In a survey of urban police agencies, 38 percent of police departments reported that their locality requires background checks for all firearm transfers; of those departments, 28 percent reported frequently or regularly investigating illegal firearm transfers, and 32 percent never investigated potentially illegal transfers (Koper, Woods, and Kubu, 2013). One-third of agencies reported receiving information about individuals prohibited from purchasing firearms who nevertheless attempted to buy one (potentially a felony). Of those departments, 45 percent reported regular follow-up on those cases, and 47 percent reported occasional follow-up. The effects of this enforcement of criminal gun possession and trafficking are unclear, because there is no research that examines how violent crimes committed with guns might be reduced through more-proactive enforcement and prosecution of gun law violations (Cook, Pollack, and White, 2019).
Random Patrol

The more-common aspects of the standard police response—specifically, the random patrol and arrest functions—are unlikely to contribute to substantial reductions in crimes committed with guns. The weakness of the standard policing model for reducing crime was evident in the mid-1970s (e.g., see the results of the Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment; Kelling et al., 1974). While patrol is a necessary function of policing, it is now commonly recognized that patrol strategies should be systematic and data-driven (Koper, 1995). Much of this realization came from research in the late 1980s and early 1990s showing that most calls for service and criminal incidents occur at a small number of locations within a city and that these “hot spots” of crime tend to be stable over time (Sherman, Gartin, and Buerger, 1989; Weisburd et al., 2004).
Responding to and Investigating Violent Crimes Committed with Guns

Federal and local law enforcement agencies respond to violent crimes committed with guns in several ways. The FBI and the ATF are involved in investigations of gun trafficking, terrorism, and mass violence. The ATF also supports investigations by tracing the ownership of firearms involved in crimes (through the National Tracing Center) and by maintaining the NIBIN, which helps link guns to offenders or to multiple crimes. Gun tracing is useful for understanding the impact of laws on the source of guns (Collins et al., 2018), as well as for identifying common features or sources involved in the time-to-crime life cycle of guns. Occasionally, traces lead back to FFL dealers who are engaged in illegal or negligent activity or to straw purchases associated with gun crimes.[5] The ATF successfully traced 254,700 firearms in 2018. The use of both the NIBIN and the National Tracing Center has generally increased over time, but we do not know whether the use of these federal resources has significantly improved investigation success rates or led to reductions in violent crimes committed with guns. However, enhanced federal prosecution of violent offenders who commit crimes with guns is potentially effective, as we discuss later.


Importantly, the enforcement and prosecution of gun crimes may affect rates of violent crimes committed with guns. Police departments that arrest those engaging in violent crimes involving a gun might be expected to reduce community gun violence by incapacitating offenders at high risk of reoffending and by deterring future offenders. Moreover, as Cook and Ludwig (2018) argue, low clearance rates may encourage vigilante justice: “Arresting less than 10 percent of shooters (as is currently the case in Chicago) may not assuage the instinct of survivors, their families, and their gangs to avenge their victimization.”[6] Although national estimates may not be exact, roughly 60 percent of homicides are cleared in any given year through arrest or other circumstances; this percentage appears to be decreasing over time (Murder Accountability Project, 2019). Similarly, national estimates of nonfatal shootings and nonfatal shooting clearances are lacking, but most indicators suggest that the frequency of nonfatal shootings is much higher than that of fatal shootings, and that clearance of nonfatal shootings is much lower than clearance of homicides (performed with guns or other weapons).


Some recent research evidence suggests that a key reason for this gap in homicide clearance compared with nonfatal shooting clearance is the amount of resources dedicated to the initial response to and sustained investigation of homicides (Cook et al., 2019). Not surprisingly, in this analysis of homicides and nonfatal shootings in one city, increased resources devoted to homicide investigations produced more on-scene and postscene evidence collection, including witnesses interviewed, forensic evidence collected, and existing records reviewed (e.g., existing search warrants). The collection of more evidence is generally associated with increased clearance. Additional resources, better on-scene evidence collection, and more postscene evidence collection or forensic testing for homicide investigations are also associated with improved outcomes (Braga, Turchan, and Barao, 2019). With wide variability in clearance rates across localities (e.g., some clear more than 80 percent of homicides; Carter, 2013), cross-jurisdictional comparisons may be insightful. Much more research is needed in this area.


Many of the standard law enforcement approaches are important activities in their own regard and logically affect crime through deterrence and incapacitation. However, the extent to which certain elements of standard policing practices—such as the consistent enforcement of gun laws, improvements in violent crime investigations and clearance rates, or an increase in the role of federal enforcement activities—are related to violent crimes committed with guns is in need of further research.
Proactive Law Enforcement Approaches

During the peak violent crime years of the 1980s, law enforcement agencies started to experiment with more-proactive ways to reduce crime using methods that better focused limited resources. We now consider proactive policing strategies that have been designed to prevent or reduce crime and note where their effects on violent crimes or violent crimes committed with guns have been evaluated empirically. Many evaluations of these strategies do not differentiate violent crimes from violent crimes involving a gun. Although guns are very likely to be involved in violent crimes (e.g., homicides, armed robberies), without specified data, we cannot detect any specific effects on crimes committed with firearms. Therefore, we know considerably less about how some of the strategies discussed in this section affect violent crime involving a gun as opposed to violent crime in general.


For our discussion of proactive law enforcement approaches, we follow the general framework adopted for a recent consensus panel report by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018) on proactive policing. This important report categorizes and describes four approaches to proactive policing:


place-based: focuses on the places where the most violent crimes committed with guns occur
problem-solving: addresses the underlying cause(s) of violent crimes committed with guns
person-focused: focuses on individuals at high risk of being perpetrators or victims of violent crimes committed with guns
community-based: uses community resources (and social connections) to counter violent crimes committed with guns and narratives supportive of such crimes.


Each of these proactive approaches has unique implementation considerations and varies with regard to the existing research evidence. Many proactive approaches overlap and can be placed in more than one of the categories. Therefore, we categorize the proactive approaches discussed in the following sections where they seem to fit best, but ours should not be considered a rigid classification.
Place-Based Approaches

Place-based approaches are predicated on the fact that crime concentrates in small geographic areas. Likewise, violent crime is not evenly distributed across communities and their populations. Typically, a large share of violent crime is associated with a small group of locations. Whether those are measured as “hot spots,” street segments, or neighborhoods, a small proportion of locations typically account for a majority of the violent crime that occurs within a city (Corsaro, 2018; Wilcox and Eck, 2011). Many violent crime prevention strategies in policing take advantage of this clustering by intervening with the subgroup of people responsible for a large share of the violence, with the locations where violent crime is most prevalent (i.e., hot spots), or with both.


Hot spot policing approaches focus on high-risk locations; many of the earliest versions of hot spot policing attempted to reduce violent crimes committed with guns through traditional law enforcement responses. These versions consist largely of stops and arrests in identified hot spots. Strategies include directed patrols, crackdowns on illegal weapon-carrying, and a focus on known offenders in hot spot locations.


In directed patrols, or “putting cops on dots,” patrol officers are assigned specific periods during which they must patrol a known high crime location (e.g., street corner, street block). Generally, this involves practicing the “Koper curve”—conducting random, 10- to 15-minute patrols in hot spots every two hours, instead of focusing only on stops and misdemeanor arrests or staying in a particular spot for long periods of time (Koper, 1995). More-recent evidence suggests that frequency of patrols, rather than duration, might be more important (Mitchell, 2017), but the overall evidence suggests that directed patrols can reduce violent crimes and violent crimes committed with guns, depending on the focus of the hot spot intervention (Braga, Papachristos, and Hureau, 2014).


Like directed patrols, crackdowns emphasize stops, searches, and arrests in hot spots, but they usually occur on a large scale and typically focus on specific problems in those areas (e.g., drug dealing, weapon-carrying). A review of hot spot crackdowns on illegal weapon-carrying found that this approach is generally associated with modest reductions in gun crimes, violent crimes committed with guns, and 911 calls for shots fired (Koper and Mayo-Wilson, 2006; see also Koper, Mayo-Wilson, and Smith, 2012). The long-term effects of these types of efforts are not well understood, but there is evidence that their effects might be short-lived (Koper, Mayo-Wilson, and Smith, 2012; Rosenfeld and Fornango, 2014; Sherman, 1990); more importantly, such efforts often contribute to police-community tensions when enacted too broadly, for too long, or without providing explanation to the community (Tyler, Fagan, and Geller, 2014). Indeed, community frustration with stop-and-frisk practices resulted in a federal judge finding the New York City Police Department liable for a pattern and practice of racial profiling and unconstitutional stops in 2013.


Another common type of place-based intervention focuses on offenders who live or gather in violent crime hot spots. As part of the Philadelphia Policing Tactics Experiment, the Philadelphia Police Department used crime analysts to identify repeat violent offenders who were living in or committing crime in violent crime hot spots. Officers then patrolled these areas and stopped and questioned repeat violent offenders. The nature of these contacts ranged from having informal conversations to serving arrest warrants. The results of a randomized controlled trial indicated that there was a 42-percent reduction in violent crimes (but not specifically in those committed with guns) and a 50-percent reduction in violent felonies relative to the control areas, which received random patrols (Groff et al., 2015).


Other place-based approaches reflect recent technological innovations. Closed-circuit television (CCTV), acoustic gunshot detection technology, and predictive policing are increasingly used to surveil and predict high crime locations. There is a substantial amount of research examining the effect of CCTV for preventing crime, and it is indicative of modest reductions in crime in general (Welsh and Farrington, 2009). The effect of CCTV on violent crimes and violent crimes committed with guns, however, is less clear. Acoustic gunshot detection technology can be used in conjunction with CCTV to detect and respond to shootings or criminal discharges of a firearm. Acoustic sensors are strategically placed in areas with high levels of shootings or violent crimes committed with guns, and advanced software is used to distinguish gunshots from other environmental noise. When gunshots are detected, an automatic alert is sent to law enforcement. The intention is to allow quicker response times to shootings in certain areas, but gunshot detection systems are typically associated with an increase in workload (which may be caused by false positives; Ratcliffe et al., 2019) and only slight improvements in response times (Mazerolle et al., 1998). There is little evidence that this method improves investigations or reduces violent crimes committed with guns (Mares and Blackburn, 2012).


Predictive policing uses historical crime data to identify locations and times in which particular crimes are most likely to occur. These predictions are then used to conduct hot spot patrols or inform other strategies. The research on predictive policing is limited, and the evidence that it reduces violent crimes is lacking. CCTV, acoustic gunshot detection, and predictive policing may lack effectiveness as stand-alone strategies, and they likely need to be used in conjunction with other strategies to effectively reduce violent crimes (Piza et al., 2015; Saunders, Hunt, and Hollywood, 2016).


One issue with place-based approaches to reducing violent crimes committed with guns is that it is difficult to know who to intervene with in target areas or hot spots (with the possible exception of offender-focused hot spot policing). This can lead to overenforcement or a “whack-a-mole” strategy, in which prioritizing certain areas leads to underenforcement of other problematic areas (Wang, Liu, and Eck, 2014). These issues, as well as intervention intensity, are particularly relevant when thinking about large-scale implementation of these kinds of approaches (Blattman et al., 2019; Collazos et al., 2020). In addition, place-based approaches that use traditional law enforcement tactics like those discussed earlier (e.g., arrest) tend to ignore the conditions that support crime at a particular location. For example, there are plenty of factors (e.g., the presence of payday lending facilities, alcohol outlets, motels, public high schools, or abandoned buildings) that have been shown to contribute to violent crimes that are not typically within the purview of police (Wilcox and Eck, 2011). Traditional policing responses within a place-based approach may be useful for targeting crimes at the worst-affected locations, but the underlying problems contributing to those crimes may go unaddressed. (Law enforcement and other elements of the criminal justice system are generally unable to effect change in the structural causes of crime and violence, such as poverty, joblessness, and concentrated disadvantage.) Addressing the criminogenic factors that police can affect (e.g., access control, lack of place management, lack of surveillance) could, in theory, lead to long-term crime prevention and eliminate the need for intensive police patrols and high arrest rates.
Problem-Solving Approaches

Problem-solving approaches address critiques of place-based policing by attempting to fix the conditions that contribute to crime in an area through a structured problem-solving process. One of the most popular problem-solving approaches is the Scanning, Analysis, Response, and Assessment (SARA) model (Eck and Spelman, 1987). The model is supposed to support an active and ongoing process that involves identifying problems (Scanning), understanding the nature of a problem through data and diverse perspectives (Analysis), developing and implementing solutions (Response), and evaluating whether the solutions were effective (Assessment). Problem-oriented policing (POP) and third-party policing are commonly used problem-solving strategies that may result from a structured problem-solving process, and they often complement one another. The main difference is that third-party policing includes the involvement of a non–law enforcement entity (e.g., property managers, parents, inspectors, civil ordinances) to exert social control and to prevent crime.


Reviews of POP in eight cities suggest that it is modestly successful at reducing crime (corresponding to a reduction of crime to 77 percent of preintervention levels, n = 11), with some evidence of reductions in violent crimes (corresponding to a reduction of violent crimes, but not specifically those committed with guns, to 81 percent of preintervention levels, n = 7) (Braga, Papachristos, and Hureau, 2014). Although there is the potential for different solutions to be implemented within the same POP strategy (one program evaluation noted 400 unique strategies; Braga, Hureau, and Papachristos, 2012), POP solutions associated with violent crime reductions seem to generally involve innovative approaches to addressing disorder and engaging the community in hot spots. The solutions often use a combination of enforcement, prevention, and other city services.
Part of the appeal of problem-oriented approaches is that they often use police power to do something other than arrest people. For example, consider Operation Cul-de-Sac, which was implemented in Los Angeles in 1990. Law enforcement recognized that a substantial proportion of gang violence was happening in one cluster of neighborhoods, largely in the form of drive-by shootings. Hot spot policing would have stopped here, sending officers to the identified areas to patrol or arrest gun offenders. In this case, however, further geospatial analysis showed that many such locations were on the periphery of a neighborhood near a main thoroughfare—ideal for both drug dealing and quickly leaving the scene of a crime. Using a nontraditional response, the Los Angeles Police Department had traffic barriers installed in specific locations to block drive-through traffic. This is a good example of the complementary nature of problem-oriented and third-party approaches, where the police used what essentially amounts to traffic control and employed external resources to add a level of permanence to that control. An evaluation indicated that gang crime, drive-by shootings, and predatory crime were significantly reduced after the start of the program; crime reduction effects diminished after the barriers were eventually withdrawn (Lasley, 1996).


Examples of POP using leverage from noncriminal regulations to create third-party solutions include getting owners to remediate blighted buildings; removing litter, graffiti, and trash from the area; abating nuisances; and improving street lighting. Given the local nature of crime, nuisance abatement can be an effective solution if high crime properties are identified with problem tenants or poor management. For example, after identifying that several motels were associated with high rates of drug and violent crime calls for service, the Chula Vista Police Department identified that poor property management may have been a source of these problems (Bichler, Schmerler, and Enriquez, 2013). The department engaged property owners by providing information and support, used code enforcement and inspection as necessary, and developed a permit ordinance focused on safety standards. Other property management solutions have focused on problematic bars that have high levels of violent crimes, encouraging management to take steps to curb overconsumption, improving security staff training, and setting clear standards for behavior (Madensen and Eck, 2008; Roncek and Maier, 1991; Warburton and Shepherd, 2006).


The POP approach has also been used to disrupt illegal gun markets (Braga and Pierce, 2005). In their analysis of recovered guns, the Boston Police Department, the ATF, and researchers identified that the illegal diversion of handguns from retail outlets was a key source of firearms used in crimes. This resulted in a strategy that involved increased resources and attention to the traffickers providing the makes and calibers most frequently recovered from gang members, increased attention to handguns recovered shortly after being sold, the restoration of obliterated serial numbers, debriefs with arrestees to understand firearm pathways and develop leads, and communication about successful interventions of traffickers. Straw purchasers and unlicensed dealers made up the bulk of those investigated for trafficking. This market interruption strategy significantly reduced the number of recovered firearms that had recently been purchased (i.e., were less than three years old).


POP is a promising strategy for crime reduction and can be used as part of a place-based approach to reduce violent crimes and violent crimes committed with guns. A key benefit of POP is that it adds new and sometimes effective crime prevention tools to traditional law enforcement responses, often through bringing attention to problems that can be remedied through third parties, such as other government and community resources (e.g., removing blight). However, there are two open questions regarding the implementation of POP to address violent crimes committed with guns.


First, the approach is open-ended, often resulting in law enforcement attempting multiple interventions in their problem-solving response formulations. This makes it difficult to identify which solutions work better than others, especially because systematic data collection on problem-solving activities tends to be limited (Maguire, Uchida, and Hassell, 2015). Second, there is some research indicating that problem-solving processes (e.g., SARA) are frequently superficial when implemented in the field (Sidebottom and Tilley, 2011). That is, patrol officers may not conduct thorough analysis of identified problems or may not conduct any assessment at all (Cordner and Biebel, 2005). Engaging in these activities, presumably, is critical for engaging in an iterative problem-solving process. In addition, and possibly as a result of superficial analysis and response generation, officers pursuing POP strategies may still rely more on standard law enforcement responses than on those designed to produce lasting change (Schnobrich-Davis, Block, and Lupacchino, 2018). More research and more-rigorous research are still needed to understand which POP responses are most effective, particularly for reducing violent crimes committed with guns.





Better Policing Toolkit
Review step-by-step guides for choosing and implementing effective policing strategies. »



Performing homicide and shooting reviews is a problem-solving strategy that has also been used to reduce homicides and shootings, either alone or in conjunction with a focused deterrence strategy, which is discussed in the next section. For instance, the strategy adopted by Milwaukee’s Homicide Review Commission was associated with a 52-percent reduction in homicides in the targeted area compared with a 9-percent reduction in the comparison area (Azrael, Braga, and O’Brien, 2013). The first step in the Milwaukee Homicide Review Commission’s strategy involves immediate responses to homicide incidents, including increased patrols, and social services for victims and victims’ families. The next component is a review of homicide (and usually shooting) cases using a multiagency working group, including police, probation officers, the district attorney, the city attorney, a U.S. attorney, public schools, the housing authority, the medical examiner, the department of corrections, the U.S. Marshals, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the FBI, the Milwaukee High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area, and the ATF. These reviews focus on describing the incidents using any pertinent information provided by the working group to strengthen investigations and increase clearance rates. Later, closed cases are reviewed by community service agencies and discussed in community reviews to identify community factors that are involved in homicides and shootings. These reviews led to interventions to address disorderly taverns and other nuisance properties, as well as enhanced supervision of high-risk offenders (15 percent of victims and 25 percent of suspects had been on supervision at the time of the homicide; close to half had been on probation at some point). This enhanced supervision reportedly included a focused deterrence approach (also known as a “pulling levers” approach), which communicates a clear deterrent message of an enhanced law enforcement response (i.e., “pulling every lever”) for specified behaviors.


Homicide and shooting reviews are recommended tools to improve intelligence-gathering, problem-solving, and information-sharing (Hipple et al., 2017). They may help law enforcement better understand the factors present in homicide and shooting incidents, such as gang member involvement, or location features, such as gang territory or nuisance locations (e.g., hourly motels, problematic bars). Although guidance exists for conducting these reviews (e.g., Braga, Hureau, and Grossman, 2014), more-rigorous research is needed to demonstrate their value and mechanisms of impact, whether through increases in case clearance or as part of a planned intervention to reduce violent crimes committed with guns.
Person-Focused Approaches
Person-focused approaches are used because violent crimes tend to cluster among a small group of people. For example, research underpinning Boston’s Operation Ceasefire revealed that 1 percent of Boston’s youth population was responsible for 60 percent of youth homicides in the city (Braga et al., 2001). Similar patterns exist in other cities with violent crime problems as well (Papachristos, Wildeman, and Roberto, 2015). Proactive policing policies that target people rather than places are another general approach that is closely associated with federal efforts to reduce violent crimes and violent crimes committed with guns. Civil Gang Injunctions and Hot Lists

One person-focused approach that focuses specifically on gang members and has been in use since the late 1980s is the civil gang injunction (CGI). CGIs prohibit gang members from engaging in a variety of legal and illegal behaviors, including associating with other gang members in public. Much like the approach of nuisance abatement, CGIs allow for civil penalties against individuals engaged in prohibited behavior, which often includes possessing any firearms, ammunition, or illegal weapons or being around others with such weapons. Prosecutors and law enforcement work to map safety zones wherein these behaviors are illegal and identify individuals and gangs included in the CGI. CGIs are indefinite, but individuals are able to petition to have their names removed from the list. The effects of CGIs on violent crime appear to be mixed, with their effects being short-lived (Grogger, 2002; Maxson, Hennigan, and Sloane, 2005) or even increasing gang violence (Bichler et al., 2019), although CGIs may be useful as part of a broader strategy (Hennigan and Sloane, 2013). The mixed findings, however, prompt questions about CGIs’ usefulness, in addition to questions about the substantial restrictions they place on individual liberty (Caldwell, 2009).


A somewhat less intrusive approach to focusing on high-risk individuals is to use intelligence-gathering or actuarial risk assessments to generate lists of individuals who are at high risk of being involved in violent crimes (i.e., “hot lists”). Sometimes, these lists are created and amended based on officer knowledge, but the recent trend involves using police data (e.g., arrests, field contact cards, or stops) and occasionally nonpolice data to generate a numeric indication of risk. This calculation is often based on an individual’s police records, as well as those of his or her associates. Because involvement in violent crime is rare, being a victim or perpetrator of violent crime or being connected to a victim or perpetrator of violent crime substantially increases individual risk. Individuals with scores above a certain threshold are targeted for intervention. A review of Chicago’s predictive policing hot list suggests that much more research is needed to improve the accuracy of actuarial risk in the context of involvement in violent crimes committed with guns and that the use of such approaches should be part of a coherent violent crime reduction strategy (Saunders et al., 2016). There are also serious concerns about the potential for bias in actuarial assessments of risk, especially because some of the predictive algorithms are proprietary and not subject to public scrutiny (Degeling and Berendt, 2018).
Enhanced Prosecution of Felony Possession 

One formative approach to reduce violent crimes committed with guns that set the stage for later approaches is Project Exile. Project Exile and similar programs specifically focus on enhanced prosecution, particularly federal prosecution, for felons in possession of firearms. Federal prosecution is often considered a valuable deterrent because federal court can sometimes impose longer prison sentences than state courts can. Lengthy sentences are often presented as achieving two aims in addressing gun crimes: (1) incapacitating incarcerated gun users for longer periods, preventing them from committing new gun crimes, and (2) deterring would-be violent criminals. The research evidence regarding the effectiveness of this approach is mixed, with only some studies finding support (Raphael and Ludwig, 2003; Rosenfeld, Fornango, and Baumer, 2005). Moreover, even the potential deterrent effect of this approach has been questioned by new criminological deterrence research that shows that many crime-prone populations, such as young men, do not consider consequences very far into the future (Doob and Webster, 2003; Durlauf and Nagin, 2011; Nagin, 2013; Paternoster, 1987). From this perspective, policies that increase the certainty of punishment are likely to be more salient than policies that increase already lengthy sentences. Because of this research, newer person-focused programs typically focus less on enhanced prosecution penalties.
Project Safe Neighborhoods

The largest person-focused brand name program, known as Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN), has received more than $1.5 billion in federal funding since 2001 and is currently active (McGarrell et al., 2010; McGarrell, 2018). Because related programs operate through the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. District Attorney’s office is either responsible for or expected to be involved in the grant activities. Therefore, an oft-stated program element for many PSN programs is enhanced federal prosecution of violent gun offenders. The hallmarks of any PSN program are interagency law enforcement partnerships (i.e., task forces), data-driven processes, deterrence-based messaging, and focused enforcement and accountability (usually on gun offenders) (McGarrell, 2018). PSN programs can use a variety of collaborative strategies, including enhanced federal prosecution, enhanced state and local prosecution, law enforcement (e.g., directed patrol), parole and probation integration, community programs, gun trafficking interventions, and gang or criminal organization interventions.


The research evidence examining the effectiveness of PSN comes from multisite evaluations that use weak quasi-experimental designs, such as those comparing sites receiving the intervention with other sites that are not matched in terms of crime trends, demographics, or other factors relevant to violent crime risk. Thus, the evidence concerning PSN interventions is necessarily weak. Nevertheless, an analysis of PSN across 82 cities from 2001 to 2006 revealed an associated 13.1-percent reduction in violent crimes and a 10.5-percent reduction in firearm homicides, but only for “high dosage” sites (McGarrell et al., 2010). Although “dosage” (a combination of collaborative implementation, research integration into strategic planning, and enhanced federal prosecution) was found to be an important element of success, this study did not assess whether certain PSN strategies were associated with larger reductions in crime than others. Therefore, it is unclear whether focused deterrence or enhanced prosecution (and offender incapacitation) alone might be effective in reducing violent crimes.
Focused Deterrence

Currently, the most promising person-focused approach for reducing violent crimes committed with guns is “pulling levers,” or focused deterrence, which is included in the PSN suite. This strategy has been implemented in many cities across the United States, and it is associated with favorable evaluation evidence overall. Focused deterrence can be considered a form of POP (Tillyer and Kennedy, 2008) because it requires a strong understanding of the problem with ongoing analysis; develops a tailored intervention based on the nature of the problem and the local resources (e.g., intervening with youth versus adults, considering probation issues); and requires an ongoing assessment of outputs, ideally with an appropriate outcome evaluation design.


Key features of the focused deterrence approach include a direct intervention with individuals who (1) are well-known to police, (2) commit a disproportionate share of crime, (3) are likely under criminal justice supervision, and (4) frequently operate in groups that influence and could thus hypothetically change group member behavior (Kennedy, 1996). In addition, focused deterrence programs address specific behaviors. Thus, there is a focus on specific individuals committing specific crimes (e.g., homicide, open-air drug dealing).


The intervention involves direct police communication with identified high-risk individuals about the consequences should they engage in specific proscribed behaviors. These communications usually occur through offender notification meetings or call-ins. The law enforcement message for a group-based focused deterrence call-in includes the following steps:


informing an individual that he or she has been identified as at high risk for engaging in or being the victim of a fatal or nonfatal shooting
stating that law enforcement is now focusing on homicides and shootings
stating that subsequent acts of violence will result in immediate action from law enforcement (or probation officials) in the form of increased attention and enforcement for the whole group. 


The call-in may include an example of group members from a previous call-in who did not heed the message. This message is intended to change the individuals’ perceptions of risk of apprehension and to induce group pressure to avoid committing violence. These messages may also be distributed to the public via radio or television. Call-ins also include speakers who represent the community, murder victims, and social services, who serve to challenge norms that encourage violence and offer alternative behaviors (National Network for Safe Communities, 2016). Many focused deterrence programs incorporate intervention components from other entities, such as criminal justice supervision (e.g., probation, parole, reentry), social services, and the community. For instance, some focused deterrence efforts use a community moral voice or outreach worker component to communicate messages of the harm caused by shootings and to counter the narratives that support street violence. Whether these components contribute to the effectiveness of focused deterrence has not been evaluated.


Versions of this focused deterrence approach have been implemented in many cities but have yet to be subjected to randomized controlled trials, the gold standard for evaluating the effects of a program. Braga, Weisburd, and Turchan (2018) recently updated their prior meta-analysis of focused deterrence interventions (n = 24) and found the approach to have “moderate effects” on violent crimes committed with guns, corresponding to a reduction to 62 percent of preintervention levels of violent crimes committed with guns. Programs that focused on groups and gangs tended to be more effective, but programs focused on high-rate offenders have also been successful (Papachristos, Meares, and Fagan, 2007).


Although the current research evidence is suggestive of significant reductions in violent gun crime, more-rigorous evaluation designs may more accurately reveal the magnitude of the true effect, given that stronger designs tend to show weaker effects (Braga and Weisburd, 2014; Braga et al., 2019). Some researchers have already begun employing more-rigorous quasi-experimental methods, with evidence of small but significant effects (Braga, Hureau, and Papachristos, 2014; Braga et al., 2019).


It is also important to begin to isolate the mechanisms by which focused deterrence might have effects. Braga (2012) discusses how most of the evaluation research on focused deterrence does not discuss the actions that contribute to reductions in violent gun crime and speculates that a wider set of mechanisms might be implicated than just those described as components of the intervention. For instance, procedural fairness, community social control, and incapacitation may play important roles beyond those features of the intervention that are explicitly parts of its design. Saunders et al. (2016) examined some of these potential mechanisms of effect for a deterrence program that focused on overt drug markets and chronic offenders within those markets. They found that community members perceived both that enforcement action incapacitated the drug market and that police were more effective, which may have improved willingness to cooperate with police. Residents did not often report improved perceptions of community social control and police legitimacy, with some negative perceptions reported (e.g., police harassment). Because the various components of focused deterrence are expected to be implemented together (e.g., direct communication, enforcement action, services), a good starting point for improved evaluation might include more-detailed measurement of program inputs, which can be modeled as part of the evaluation to understand whether certain components are more important than others (Roman et al., 2018).


Measuring the mechanisms and dosage of focused deterrence over time speaks to the final critical issue for its success—sustainability. Sustainability is a major concern for both PSN and focused deterrence programs (McGarrell et al., 2010). Several evaluations have noted that the effects appear to be short-lived. Fox and Novak (2018), in a recent evaluation of Kansas City’s focused deterrence program, found that there was an immediate reduction in homicides and gun-involved aggravated assaults during the first 12 months of the intervention, but these rates returned to pre-intervention levels three years into the program. Similarly, Grunwald and Papachristos (2017) found that the significant effects of PSN in Chicago were only evident during the first several years of the program. Unlike Fox and Novak (2018), however, Grunwald and Papachristos speculate that this was caused by program expansion that did not include an expansion of resources, reducing the intervention dosage. Even the highly successful and acclaimed Boston Ceasefire, also known as the Boston Miracle, was abandoned (and later revived), with corresponding increases (and decreases) in violent crimes committed with guns (Braga, Hureau, and Winship, 2008; Braga, Hureau, and Papachristos, 2014). Such an ebb-and-flow process for implementation dosage might be common with these programs, and although recommendations exist (Tillyer, Engel, and Lovins, 2012), the sustainability issue has not been examined systematically.
Community-Based Approaches

One of the tensions created by the proactive approaches is that they are very targeted, and those targets are often underrepresented minorities and places that are frequented by these groups. Community-based efforts are based on responding to this tension and seek to foster social cohesion, trust, and willingness to work together to confront crime. Many of these approaches target the community-level physical or social factors that may contribute to environmental risk of violent crimes, such as social disorganization, narratives supportive of violence, the prevalence of gangs, or abandoned or blighted properties. The main feature of these community-based programs is that they are not led by law enforcement. Instead, law enforcement agencies are asked to support and enable the effort. These community partnerships can have the benefit of enhancing police legitimacy or improving community relations, in addition to reducing violence. One way this has been done is through partnerships between police and black clergy, combining the social capital and existing community networks of black churches with messages of nonviolence, engaging in information-sharing or messaging that communicates the nature of police actions, and increasing ownership of crime problems by the community. Still, there are challenges inherent in building and sustaining such community partnership approaches that may be related to the political, interpersonal, and social dynamics of the community (Brunson et al., 2013). In addition, it is unclear whether such efforts directly affect violent crimes involving guns.


One of the most well-known community-based approaches targeted at preventing violent crimes committed with guns is Cure Violence, or the violence interrupter model (Slutkin, Ransford, and Decker, 2015). Violence interrupters and outreach workers tend to be individuals with prior gang involvement, involvement in the justice system, or local connections who use their knowledge, experience, and relationships to understand and interrupt gun violence and the cycle of retaliatory violence. The core components of the model include detecting and interrupting potentially violent conflicts (e.g., at shooting scenes, community events); identifying, engaging with, and managing high-risk individuals; and communicating and changing community norms to reject violence. These programs are not driven by law enforcement but may be coordinated with law enforcement. For example, interrupters may rely on law enforcement for notifications of shooting incidents, hot spot maps, or other official data to guide their work. The nature of this work often requires avoiding a perception that interrupters are cooperating with law enforcement, and, in some cases, it is marked by open hostility toward police (Kennedy, 2011). Often, these programs work through official partnerships with hospitals. Research suggests that the effectiveness of this model is mixed and suffers from weak evaluation designs (Butts et al., 2015). Further research is needed to understand factors contributing to mixed results, which may be informed by a forthcoming systematic review (for details, see Maguire, Telep, and Abt, 2018).


Several other community-based approaches focus on improving property and economic conditions that have been found to be associated with reductions in violent crimes committed with guns. For instance, Moyer et al. (2019) discuss a Philadelphia study in which 110 clusters of blocks in the city were randomly assigned to have their vacant lots receive a greening intervention, a less-intensive mowing and trash collection intervention, or no intervention. Both the greening intervention, which created a “parklike” environment, and the less-intensive mowing and trash pickup intervention were associated with statistically significant reductions in shootings.


Similarly, the emergence of business improvement districts (BIDs) have also been associated with reductions in violent crimes. BID organizations consist of business and property owners interested in economic and urban development efforts aimed at revitalizing urban areas. They often pay for supplemental security and sanitation services in an effort to create safe and clean spaces to reduce fear and crime, with the goal of attracting more consumers. BIDs have been associated with reduced rates of robbery and violent crimes, primarily within the boundaries of the BID area (MacDonald et al., 2010; MacDonald et al., 2013). Similarly, gentrification, or the population and housing shifts that occur when higher-income households move into lower-income areas, has been associated with lower rates of violent crimes (Papachristos et al., 2011; Barton, 2016), although this is not always the case, and gentrification may cause short-term increases in violent crimes (Lee, 2010). It is difficult to verify that gentrification caused the drops in crime rather than the other way around (O’Sullivan, 2005). Both BIDs and gentrification face serious challenges from existing community residents because they often exclude current residents or influence local political decisionmaking in ways that may exacerbate existing social inequality (Hoyt and Gopal-Agge, 2007).


All of the community-based approaches discussed earlier have advantages over traditional policing practices that may contribute to long-term effects; however, the research evidence is very limited and tends to be mixed. In addition, there are challenges to implementing and sustaining these efforts, often corresponding to the social, political, and environmental conditions in which they are embedded. Nonetheless, they deserve to be considered as part of the toolkit for preventing community gun violence, in part because they provide an entry point into a community-focused understanding of gun violence. The reality is that (1) homicides in the United States are concentrated in poor urban communities, and (2) the homicide rate, which is driven by gun violence in the United States, dropped 50 percent from 1980 to 2016.[7] This drop is even more dramatic in large cities with more than 1 million people, where the drop was 70 percent from 1990 to 2016 (James, 2018). Simply put, communities, especially urban minority communities, are much safer than they were 30 years ago (Sharkey, 2018). As a research exercise, it is impossible to identify any one cause, but research does suggest that it is important not to overemphasize law enforcement to the exclusion of other community-based efforts by both government and nonprofit agencies (Sharkey, Torrats-Espinosa, and Takyar, 2017). In addition, although community approaches may have unique impacts on violent crimes committed with guns, it is important not to overlook the potential for collaborative partnerships between community groups and law enforcement to target and resolve particular problems or sources of violent crimes committed with guns, which may contribute to other important second-order effects (e.g., better police-community relations and legitimacy, improved cooperation from the community in investigating violent crimes, improved case clearance). While such collaborative efforts certainly exist, little is known about their effects.
Conclusions

In this essay, we have reviewed a range of reactive and proactive law enforcement approaches to enforce gun laws and to respond to and prevent gun crime. The research in this space is rather uneven. Although we have a general sense that law enforcement deserves some credit for the drop in the number of homicides committed with guns, very little is known about the exact mechanisms through which standard law enforcement practices, such as enforcement of gun ownership laws or investigations of violent crimes committed with guns, might affect rates of criminal misuse of guns and violent crimes committed with guns. As a result, we do not have strong evidence for the best approaches to improving case clearance. The evidence for the mechanisms behind proactive policing is stronger, and the recent National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018) evaluation was cautiously optimistic about these approaches, particularly in the short term.


The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine evaluation was also quick to note that the research that does exist suffers from important limitations, including that evidence does not typically derive from rigorous experimental designs, or even strong quasi-experimental designs, that might help distinguish the effects of the policing intervention from local trends in violent crimes (see Braga and Weisburd, 2014). Similarly, the studies that have been conducted are often evaluations of complex interventions involving multiple agencies or multiple potential mechanisms of effect. As a result, it is difficult to evaluate which intervention components are critical to success and nearly impossible to replicate more than just the spirit or general principles of the intervention in a new location. Finally, some interventions may work best only in the short term because of challenges in sustaining the collaborations, expertise, focus, and unity of purpose they require to remain effective. In general, much of our knowledge about the effectiveness of a variety of policing approaches is limited to the short term (one to two years of data) and is focused on small geographic units (e.g., hot spots, cities), while much of our knowledge about the effects of gun ownership laws relies on long-term evaluations and is focused on large geographic units (e.g., states, nations). Efforts to merge these lines of research may prove useful—for example, new state regulations requiring a permit to purchase a handgun could be evaluated at the city level to discover how the regulations contributed to changes in enforcement and crime. With these important caveats, there is some evidence that place-based approaches, problem-solving approaches, and person-focused approaches can reduce violent crimes and violent crimes committed with guns when appropriately matched to the problem and when implemented well. More-rigorous research is needed for each of the approaches discussed in this essay.

Violent CrimeNotes

We omit discussion of the potential impact of law enforcement activity on other types of gun violence (e.g., suicides, accidents) or specific types of violent crime (e.g., gang crime, domestic violence). We do note where research evidence suggests that a particular law enforcement approach is empirically associated with reductions in violent crimes that are not specific to violent crimes committed with guns. According to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, firearms were involved in 70 percent of all homicides from 1993 to 2011, but less than 10 percent of all nonfatal violent crime involved a firearm (Planty and Truman, 2013). As a result, the exact impact of a given policy on the prevalence of violent crimes committed with guns is uncertain in some cases. Finally, although our goal is to comment on the existing state of the research evidence, several of the approaches that we discuss are part of complex systems and are inherently difficult to evaluate even with the most-rigorous research designs (e.g., randomized controlled designs). In addition, some of the approaches discussed here are still relatively new, and research tends to accumulate slowly. Therefore, to say that an approach needs more evaluation does not necessarily mean that it does not play a useful role or that it does not affect outcomes. Return to content ⤴
This form of law enforcement replaces the private pursuit of justice (i.e., vigilantism) with the public or societal pursuit of justice. Return to content ⤴
Many of these approaches have been the subject of systematic reviews or meta-analyses elsewhere. Where that is the case, we consulted those sources. Where that is not the case, we used a targeted search of the literature to describe the approach and provide examples to illustrate the application of the approach. We also rely on many of the judgments and much of the framework used in a report on proactive policing by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018). Return to content ⤴
Regulatory activities might be considered proactive, in the sense that they do not usually respond to a reported crime or infraction. We consider regulatory activities as standard law enforcement because these activities are often more akin to a random patrol approach to uncover ongoing crime, and there does not seem to be a strategic decision to emphasize prevention. For example, even though random patrols are not focused on being proactive or preventing crime, the presence of officers on patrol does provide a general level of deterrence and may occasionally result in the discovery of a crime or violation that has not been reported. Regulatory activity is more analogous to this than to the proactive approaches we discuss later. Return to content ⤴
A straw purchase is when someone goes through the gun purchasing process (including the background check) and gives the gun to another person upon receipt. Return to content ⤴
Clearance by arrest occurs when at least one person is arrested for a crime, charged, and turned over to the court for prosecution; clearance by exceptional means occurs when an agency has identified at least one person, gathered enough evidence for an arrest, identified the person or people’s location(s)—but then encountered an obstacle that prevented arrest (FBI, 2012). Return to content ⤴
The bulk of this drop occurred from 1993 to 2014; there has been a slight increase since 2014. Return to content ⤴
References

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller, “Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 105, No. 490, 2010, pp. 493–505.
Abutaleb, Yasmeen, and William Wan, “After Trump Blames Mental Illness for Mass Shootings, Health Agencies Ordered to Hold All Posts on Issue,” Washington Post, August 20, 2019.
Adler, W. C., F. M. Bielke, D. J. Doi, and J. F. Kennedy, Cops Under Fire: Law Enforcement Officers Killed with Assault Weapons or Guns with High Capacity, Washington, D.C.: Handgun Control, Inc., 1995.
Ahmedani, Brian K., Gregory E. Simon, Christine Stewart, Arne Beck, Beth E. Waitzfelder, Rebecca Rossom, Frances Lynch, Ashli Owen-Smith, Enid M. Hunkeler, Ursula Whiteside, Belinda H. Operskalski, M. Justin Coffey, and Leif I. Solberg, “Health Care Contacts in the Year Before Suicide Death,” Journal of General Internal Medicine, Vol. 29, No. 6, 2014, pp. 870–877.
Albert, Adelin, and John A. Anderson, “On the Existence of Maximum Likelihood Estimates in Logistic Regression Models,” Biometrika, Vol. 71, No. 1, 1984, pp. 1–10.
Alcorn, Ted, “Trends in Research Publications About Gun Violence in the United States, 1960 to 2014,” JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 177, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 124–126.
Alcorn, Ted, and Scott Burris, “Gun Violence Prevention,” Lancet, Vol. 388, No. 10041, 2016, p. 233.
Aldrich, John H., and Forrest D. Nelson, Linear Probability, Logit, and Probit Models, Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1984.
Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Regressive Sin Taxes, with an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 134, No. 3, 2019, pp. 1557–1626.
1971–2019,” GunPolicy.org, October 7, 2019.
Alpers, Philip, and Michael Picard, “Australia—Gun Facts, Figures and the Law,” GunPolicy.org, 2020.
American Law Institute, Model Penal Code, Section 2.02 cmt.at 238, 1985.
AmmoSpy, “Trending,” webpage, undated. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.ammospy.net/trending
Andersen, Ronald, Martin R. Frankel, and Judith Kasper, Total Survey Error: Applications to Improve Health Surveys, San Francisco, Calif.: Jossey-Bass, 1979.
Anderson, D. Mark, and Joseph J. Sabia, “Child-Access-Prevention Laws, Youths’ Gun Carrying, and School Shootings,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 61, No. 3, August 2018, pp. 489–524.
Andrés, Antonio Rodríguez, and Katherine Hempstead, “Gun Control and Suicide: The Impact of State Firearm Regulations in the United States, 1995–2004,” Health Policy, Vol. 101, No. 1, 2011, pp. 95–103.
Aneja, Abhay, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws and the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2011, pp. 565–631.
Aneja, Abhay, John J. Donohue III, and Alexandria Zhang, The Impact of Right to Carry Laws and the NRC Report: Lessons for the Empirical Evaluation of Law and Policy, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Law School, Olin Working Paper No. 461, December 1, 2014.
Anestis, M. D., “Prior Suicide Attempts Are Less Common in Suicide Decedents Who Died by Firearms Relative to Those Who Died by Other Means,” Journal of Affective Disorders, Vol. 189, No. 1, 2016, pp. 106–109.
Anestis, Michael D., and Joye C. Anestis, “Suicide Rates and State Laws Regulating Access and Exposure to Handguns,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 10, 2015, pp. 2049–2058.
Appleby, Louis, John A. Dennehy, Christopher S. Thomas, E. Brian Faragher, and Glyn Lewis, “Aftercare and Clinical Characteristics of People with Mental Illness Who Commit Suicide: A Case-Control Study,” Lancet, Vol. 353, No. 9162, 1999, pp. 1397–1400.
Arria, Amelia M., Emily R. Winick, Laura M. Garnier-Dykstra, Kathryn B. Vincent, Kimberly M. Caldeira, Holly C. Wilcox, and Kevin E. O’Grady, “Help Seeking and Mental Health Service Utilization Among College Students with a History of Suicide Ideation,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 62, No. 12, 2011, pp. 1510–1513.
Associated Press and USA Today, “Report: 2019 Records 41 Mass Killings in United States,” Tucson.com, December 28, 2019.
ATF—See Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Avraham, Jacob B., Spiros G. Frangos, and Charles J. DiMaggio, “The Epidemiology of Firearm Injuries Managed in US Emergency Departments,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 5, No. 38, 2018.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Nondiscretionary Concealed Weapons Laws: A Case Study of Statistics, Standards of Proof, and Public Policy,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 1, No. 1–2, January 1999, pp. 436–470.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 9336, November 2002.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003a, pp. 1193–1312.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “The Latest Misfires in Support of the 'More Guns, Less Crime' Hypothesis,” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003b, pp. 1371–1398.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “Yet Another Refutation of the More Guns, Less Crime Hypothesis—with Some Help from Moody and Marvell,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2009a, pp. 35–59.
Ayres, Ian, and John J. Donohue III, “More Guns, Less Crime Fails Again: The Latest Evidence from 1977–2006,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 2, May 2009b, pp. 218–238.
Azrael, D., A. A. Braga, and M. E. O’Brien, Developing the Capacity to Understand and Prevent Homicide: An Evaluation of the Milwaukee Homicide Review Commission, Boston, Mass.: Harvard School of Public Health, 2013.
Azrael, Deborah, Joanna Cohen, Carmel Salhi, and Matthew Miller, “Firearm Storage in Gun-Owning Households with Children: Results of a 2015 National Survey,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018, pp. 295–304.
Azrael, Deborah, Philip J. Cook, and Matthew Miller, “State and Local Prevalence of Firearms Ownership Measurement, Structure, and Trends,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 20, No. 1, March 2004, pp. 43–62.
Azrael, Deborah, Lisa Hepburn, David Hemenway, and Matthew Miller, “The Stock and Flow of U.S. Firearms: Results from the 2015 National Firearms Survey,” Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 5, 2017, pp. 38–57.
Azrael, Deborah, and Matthew Miller, “Reducing Suicide Without Affecting Underlying Mental Health: Theoretical Underpinnings and a Review of the Evidence Base Lining the Availability of Lethal Means and Suicide,” in Rory C. O’Connor and Jane Pirkis, eds., The International Handbook of Suicide Prevention, 2nd ed., Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley and Sons, 2016.
Baekgaard, Martin, Julian Christensen, Casper Mondrup Dahlmann, Asbjørn Mathiasen, and Niels Bjørn Grund Petersen, “The Role of Evidence in Politics: Motivated Reasoning and Persuasion Among Politicians,” British Journal of Political Science, Vol. 49, No. 3, July 2019, pp. 1117–1140.
Bailey, J. E., A. L. Kellermann, G. W. Somes, J. G. Banton, F. P. Rivara, and N. P. Rushforth, “Risk Factors for Violent Death of Women in the Home,” Archives of Internal Medicine, Vol. 157, No. 7, 1997, pp. 777–782.
Baker, Jeanine, and Samara McPhedran, “Gun Laws and Sudden Death: Did the Australian Firearms Legislation of 1996 Make a Difference?” British Journal of Criminology, Vol. 47, No. 3, 2007, pp. 455–469.
Baker, Jeanine, and Samara McPhedran, “Australian Firearm Related Deaths: New Findings and Implications for Crime Prevention and Health Policies Following Revisions to Official Death Count Data,” International Journal of Criminal Justice Sciences, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2015, pp. 1–9.
Barati, Mehdi, “New Evidence on the Impact of Concealed Carry Weapon Laws on Crime,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 47, 2016, pp. 76–83.
Barber, Catherine, Deborah Azrael, Amy Cohen, Matthew Miller, Deonza Thymes, David Enze Wang, and David Hemenway, “Homicides by Police: Comparing Counts from the National Violent Death Reporting System, Vital Statistics, and Supplementary Homicide Reports,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 106, No. 5, May 2016, pp. 922–927.
Barber, Catherine, and David Hemenway, “Too Many or Too Few Unintentional Firearm Deaths in Official U.S. Mortality Data?” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 43, No. 3, 2011, pp. 724–731.
Barber, C., D. Hemenway, J. Hochstadt, and D. Azrael, “Underestimates of Unintentional Firearm Fatalities: Comparing Supplementary Homicide Report Data with the National Vital Statistics System,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2002, pp. 252–256.
Barkin, Shari L., Stacia A. Finch, Edward H. Ip, Benjamin Scheindlin, Joseph A. Craig, Jennifer Steffes, Victoria Weiley, Eric Slora, David Altman, and Richard C. Wasserman, “Is Office-Based Counseling About Media Use, Timeouts, and Firearm Storage Effective? Results from a Cluster-Randomized, Controlled Trial,” Pediatrics, Vol. 122, No. 1, 2008, pp. E15–E25.
Bartley, William Alan, and Mark A. Cohen, “The Effect of Concealed Weapons Laws: An Extreme Bound Analysis,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 36, No. 2, 1998, pp. 258–265.
Barton, M. S., “Gentrification and Violent Crime in New York City,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 62, No. 9, 2016, pp. 1180–1202.
Bartos, Bradley J., Richard McCleary, Lorraine Mazerolle, and Kelsy Luengen, “Controlling Gun Violence: Assessing the Impact of Australia’s Gun Buyback Program Using a Synthetic Control Group Experiment,” Prevention Science, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2020, pp. 131–136.
Bate, Roger, Cody Kallen, and Aparna Mathur, “The Perverse Effect of Sin Taxes: The Rise of Illicit White Cigarettes,” Applied Economics, Vol. 52, No. 8, 2020, pp. 789–805.
BBC Research & Consulting, The Economic Impacts of Hunting, Fishing and Wildlife Watching in Colorado, Denver, Colo., September 26, 2008.
Beard, T. Randolph, Paula A. Gant, and Richard P. Saba, “Border-Crossing Sales, Tax Avoidance, and State Tax Policies: An Application to Alcohol,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 64, No. 1, July 1997, pp. 293–306.
Beauchamp, Zack, “Australia Confiscated 650,000 Guns. Murders and Suicides Plummeted,” Vox, May 18, 2018.
Beekman, Daniel, “How Gun-Tax Legislation Would Affect Seattle Firearms Stores,” Seattle Times, July 29, 2015.
Beekman, Daniel, “Seattle’s Gun Tax Raised $93,000 Last Year,” Seattle Times, March 16, 2018.
Benson, Bruce L., and Brent D. Mast, “Privately Produced General Deterrence,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 725–746.
Berk, Richard A., and Susan B. Sorenson, “Algorithmic Approach to Forecasting Rare Violent Events: An Illustration Based in Intimate Partner Violence Perpetration,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 213–233.
Berrigan, John, Deborah Azrael, David Hemenway, and Matthew Miller, “Firearms Training and Storage Practices Among US Gun Owners: A Nationally Representative Study,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 25, Supp. 1, 2019, pp. i31–i38.
Betz, M. E., C. Barber, and M. Miller, “Suicidal Behavior and Firearm Access: Results from the Second Injury Control and Risk Survey,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 41, No. 4, 2011, pp. 384–391.
Betz, M. E., M. Miller, C. Barber, B. Beaty, I. Miller, C. A. Camargo, Jr., and E. D. Boudreaux, “Lethal Means Access and Assessment Among Suicidal Emergency Department Patients,” Depression and Anxiety, Vol. 33, No. 6, 2016, pp. 502–511.
Bichler, G., A. Norris, J. R. Dmello, and J. Randle, “The Impact of Civil Gang Injunctions on Networked Violence Between the Bloods and the Crips,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 65, No. 7, 2019, pp. 875–915.
Bichler, Gisela, Karin Schmerler, and Janet Enriquez, “Curbing Nuisance Motels: An Evaluation of Police as Place Regulators,” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and Management, Vol. 36, No. 2, 2013, pp. 437–462.
Bice, Douglas C., and David D. Hemley, “The Market for New Handguns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2002, pp. 251–265.
Birckmayer, J., and D. Hemenway, “Suicide and Firearm Prevalence: Are Youth Disproportionately Affected?” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 31, No. 3, 2001, pp. 303–310.
Black, Dan A., and Daniel S. Nagin, “Do Right-to-Carry Laws Deter Violent Crime?” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1998, pp. 209–219.
Blair, Janet M., Katherine A. Fowler, Shane P. D. Jack, and Alexander E. Crosby, “The National Violent Death Reporting System: Overview and Future Directions,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 22, Supp. 1, 2016, pp. i6–11.
Blair, J. Pete, and Katherine W. Schweit, A Study of Active Shooter Incidents, 2000–2013, Washington, D.C.: Texas State University and Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice, 2014.
Blattman, C., D. Green, D. Ortega, and S. Tobón, “Place-Based Interventions at Scale: The Direct and Spillover Effects of Policing and City Services on Crime,” BFI Working Paper, 2019.
Blau, Benjamin M., Devon H. Gorry, and Chip Wade, “Guns, Laws, and Public Shootings in the United States,” Applied Economics, Vol. 48, No. 49, 2016, pp. 4732–4746.
Bohnert, A. S., J. F. McCarthy, R. V. Ignacio, M. A. Ilgen, A. Eisenberg, and F. C. Blow, “Misclassification of Suicide Deaths: Examining the Psychiatric History of Overdose Decedents,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 6, 2013, pp. 326–330.
Booty, Marisa, Jayne O’Dwyer, Daniel Webster, Alex McCourt, and Cassandra Crifasi, “Describing a ‘Mass Shooting’: The Role of Databases in Understanding Burden,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2019, article 47.
Borowsky, I. W., M. D. Resnick, M. Ireland, and R. W. Blum, “Suicide Attempts Among American Indian and Alaska Native Youth: Risk and Protective Factors,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 153, No. 6, 1999, pp. 573–580.
Bose, Jonaki, Sarra L. Hedden, Rachel N. Lipari, and Eunice Park-Lee, Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Rockville, Md.: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, September 2018.
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, “About Brady,” webpage, undated. As of January 10, 2016: http://www.bradycampaign.org/about-brady
Braga, A. A., “Getting Deterrence Right: Evaluation Evidence and Complementary Crime Control Mechanisms,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 11, 2012, pp. 201–210.
Braga, Anthony A., “Guns and Crime,” in F. Parisi, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Law and Economics, Vol. 3: Public Law and Legal Institutions, New York: Oxford University Press, 2017, pp. 344–369.
Braga, A. A., D. Hureau, and L. Grossman, Managing Group Violence Reduction Strategies: The Value of Shooting Scorecards, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, 2014.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Hureau, and A. V. Papachristos, “An Ex Post Facto Evaluation Framework for Place-Based Police Interventions,” Evaluation Review, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2012, pp. 592–626.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Hureau, and A. V. Papachristos, “Deterring Gang-Involved Gun Violence: Measuring the Impact of Boston’s Operation Ceasefire on Street Gang Behavior,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 30, No. 1, 2014, pp. 113–139.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Hureau, and C. Winship, “Losing Faith? Police, Black Churches, and the Resurgence of Youth Violence in Boston,” Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, 2008.
Braga, A. A., D. M. Kennedy, E. J. Waring, and A. M. Piehl, “Problem-Oriented Policing, Deterrence, and Youth Violence: An Evaluation of Boston’s Operation Ceasefire,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 38, No. 3, 2001, pp. 195–225.
Braga, Anthony A., Andrew V. Papachristos, and David M. Hureau, “The Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 31, No. 4, 2014, pp. 633–663.
Braga, A. A., and G. L. Pierce, “Disrupting Illegal Firearms Markets in Boston: The Effects of Operation Ceasefire on the Supply of New Handguns to Criminals,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 4, 2005, pp. 717–748.
Braga, A. A., B. Turchan, and L. Barao, “The Influence of Investigative Resources on Homicide Clearances,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 35, No. 2, 2019, pp. 337–364.
Braga, Anthony A., and David L. Weisburd, “The Effects of Focused Deterrence Strategies on Crime: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 49, No. 3, 2012, pp. 323–358.
Braga, A. A., and D. L. Weisburd, “Must We Settle for Less Rigorous Evaluations in Large Area-Based Crime Prevention Programs? Lessons from a Campbell Review of Focused Deterrence,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2014, pp. 573–597.
Braga, Anthony A., David Weisburd, and Brandon Turchan, “Focused Deterrence Strategies and Crime Control: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Evidence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2018, pp. 205–250.
Braga, Anthony A., Garen J. Wintemute, Glenn L. Pierce, Philip J. Cook, and Greg Ridgeway, “Interpreting the Empirical Evidence on Illegal Gun Market Dynamics,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 89, No. 5, 2012, pp. 779–793.
Braga, A. A., G. Zimmerman, L. Barao, C. Farrell, R. K. Brunson, and A. V. Papachristos, “Street Gangs, Gun Violence, and Focused Deterrence: Comparing Place-Based and Group-Based Evaluation Methods to Estimate Direct and Spillover Deterrent Effects,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 56, No. 4, 2019, pp. 524–562.
Branas, C. C., T. S. Richmond, D. P. Culhane, T. R. Ten Have, and D. J. Wiebe, “Investigating the Link Between Gun Possession and Gun Assault,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 99, No. 11, 2009, pp. 2034–2040.
Brauer, Jurgen, Daniel Montolio, and Elisa Trujillo-Baute, “How Do US State Firearms Laws Affect Firearms Manufacturing Location? An Empirical Investigation, 1986–2010,” Journal of Economic Geography, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2017, pp. 753–790.
Brenan, Megan, “Most U.S. Teachers Oppose Carrying Guns in Schools,” Gallup, March 16, 2018.
Brent, D. A., M. Baugher, J. Bridge, T. H. Chen, and L. Chiappetta, “Suicide in Affectively Ill Adolescents: A Case-Control Study,” Journal of Affective Disorders, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1994, pp. 193–202.
Brent, D. A., M. Baugher, J. Bridge, T. H. Chen, and L. Chiappetta, “Age- and Sex-Related Risk Factors for Adolescent Suicide,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 38, No. 12, 1999, pp. 1497–1505.
Brent, D. A., J. A. Perper, C. J. Allman, G. M. Moritz, M. E. Wartella, and J. P. Zelenak, “The Presence and Accessibility of Firearms in the Homes of Adolescent Suicides: A Case-Control Study,” JAMA, Vol. 266, No. 21, 1991, pp. 2989–2995.
Brent, D. A., J. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, and C. Allman, “Suicide in Adolescents with No Apparent Psychopathology,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1993a, pp. 494–500.
Brent, D. A., J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, and C. Roth, “Firearms and Adolescent Suicide—A Community Case-Control Study,” American Journal of Diseases of Children, Vol. 147, No. 10, 1993b, pp. 1066–1071.
Bridges, F. Stephen, Kimberly M. Tatum, and Julie C. Kunselman, “Domestic Violence Statutes and Rates of Intimate Partner and Family Homicide,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2008, pp. 117–130.
Briggs, J. T., and A. Tabarrok, “Firearms and Suicides in U.S. States,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 37, 2014, pp. 180–188.
Britt, Chester L., Gary Kleck, and David J. Bordua, “A Reassessment of the D.C. Gun Law: Some Cautionary Notes on the Use of Interrupted Time Series Designs for Policy Impact Assessment,” Law and Society Review, Vol. 30, No. 2, 1996, pp. 361–380.
Bronars, Stephen G., and John R. Lott, Jr., “Criminal Deterrence, Geographic Spillovers, and the Right to Carry Concealed Handguns,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, 1998, pp. 475–479.
Brunson, R. K., A. A. Braga, D. M. Hureau, and K. Pegram, “We Trust You, but Not That Much: Examining Police-Black Clergy Partnerships to Reduce Youth Violence,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2013, pp. 1006–1036.
Buchanan, Larry, Josh Keller, Richard A. Oppel, Jr., and Daniel Victor, “How They Got Their Guns,” New York Times, June 12, 2016.
Buchanan, Larry, Josh Keller, Richard A. Oppel, Jr., and Daniel Victor, “How They Got Their Guns,” New York Times, February 14, 2018.
Bukstein, O. G., D. A. Brent, J. A. Perper, G. Moritz, M. Baugher, J. Schweers, C. Roth, and L. Balach, “Risk Factors for Completed Suicide Among Adolescents with a Lifetime History of Substance Abuse: A Case-Control Study,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Vol. 88, No. 6, 1993, pp. 403–408.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Crime Gun Trace Analysis Reports: The Illegal Youth Firearms Market in Seventeen Communities, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1997.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Crime Gun Trace Reports (2000): Memphis, Tennessee, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 2002.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, 2012 Summary: Firearms Reported Lost and Stolen, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2013.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, FFL Thefts/Losses: January 1, 2015–December 31, 2015, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016a.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Firearms Commerce in the United States: Annual Statistical Update 2016, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016b.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Annual Firearms Manufacturing and Export Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, January 27, 2017.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Firearms Commerce in the United States: Annual Statistical Update 2018, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2018.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) Theft/Loss Report: January 1, 2018–December 31, 2018, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2019.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, “Fact Sheet—Facts and Figures for Fiscal Year 2018,” May 2019a. As of March 27, 2020: https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/fact-sheet/fact-sheet-facts-and-figures-fiscal-year-2018
Bureau of Justice Statistics, “National Crime Statistics Exchange: Powering the Transition to NIBRS,” webpage, undated. As of September 6, 2019: https://www.bjs.gov/content/ncsx.cfm
Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Data Collection: National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS),” webpage, 2017a. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=301
Bureau of Justice Statistics, “NCVS Redesign: Subnational,” webpage, 2017b. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=911
Burnham, Kenneth P., and David R. Anderson, “Multimodel Inference: Understanding AIC and BIC in Model Selection,” Sociological Methods and Research, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2004, pp. 261–304.
Butkus, Renee, and Arlene Weissman, “Internists’ Attitudes Toward Prevention of Firearm Injury,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 160, No. 12, 2014, pp. 821–827.
Butts, J. A., C. G. Roman, L. Bostwick, and J. R. Porter, “Cure Violence: A Public Health Model to Reduce Gun Violence,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 36, 2015, pp. 39–53.
Cabrera, Joseph F., and Roy Kwon, “Income Inequality, Household Income, and Mass Shooting in the United States,” Frontiers in Public Health, Vol. 6, October 2018, article 294.
Cai, Weiyi, and Jugal K. Patel, “A Half-Century of School Shootings Like Columbine, Sandy Hook and Parkland,” New York Times, May 11, 2019.
Cagle, M. Christine, and J. Michael Martinez, “Have Gun, Will Travel: The Dispute Between the CDC and the NRA on Firearm Violence as a Public Health Problem,” Politics & Policy, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2004, pp. 278–310.
Caldwell, B., “Criminalizing Day-to-Day Life: A Socio-Legal Critique of Gang Injunctions,” American Journal of Criminal Law, Vol. 37, No. 3, 2009, pp. 241–290.
California Department of Justice, “General Notice of Firearm Prohibition and Power of Attorney for Firearms Relinquishment, Sale, or Transfer for Storage,” BOF 110, October 2015.
Callahan, Molly, “The Story Behind the Data on Mass Murder in the United States,” Northeastern University, August 13, 2019.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90, No. 3, 2008, pp. 414–427.
Campbell Collaboration, Guidelines for Preparation of Review Protocols, Version 1.0, Oslo, Norway, January 1, 2001.
Campbell, Jacquelyn C., Nancy Glass, Phyllis W. Sharps, Kathryn Laughon, and Tina Bloom, “Intimate Partner Homicide: Review and Implications of Research and Policy,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2007, pp. 246–269.
Campbell, J. C., D. Webster, J. Kozio-McLain, C. Block, D. Campbell, M. A. Curry, F. Gary, N. Glass, J. McFarlane, C. Sachs, P. Sharps, Y. Ulrich, S. A. Wilt, J. Manganello, X. Xu, J. Schollenberger, V. Frye, and K. Laughon, “Risk Factors for Femicide in Abusive Relationships: Results from a Multisite Case Control Study,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 93, No. 7, 2003, pp. 1089–1097.
Campbell, Sean, and Daniel Nass, “The CDC’s Gun Injury Data Is Becoming Even Less Reliable,” FiveThirtyEight, March 11, 2019.
Campbell, Sean, Daniel Nass, and Mai Nguyen, “The CDC Is Publishing Unreliable Data on Gun Injuries. People Are Using It Anyway,” FiveThirtyEight, October 4, 2018.
Cantor, D., “Substantive Implications of Longitudinal Design Features: The National Crime Survey as a Case Study,” in D. Kasprzyk, G. Duncan, G. Kalton, and M. P. Singh, eds., Panel Surveys, New York: John Wiley, 1989, pp. 25–51.
Capellan, Joel Alfredo, and Alexei Anisin, “A Distinction Without a Difference? Examining the Causal Pathways Behind Ideologically Motivated Mass Public Shootings,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2018, pp. 235–255.
Capellan, Joel A., and SimonPeter Gomez, “Change and Stability in Offender, Behaviours, and Incident‐Level Characteristics of Mass Public Shootings in the United States, 1984–2015,” Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2018, pp. 51–72.
Capellan, Joel A., and Allan Y. Jiao, Deconstructing Mass Public Shootings: Exploring Opportunities for Intervention, Albany, N.Y.: Rockefeller Institute of Government, October 2019.
Capellan, Joel A., Joseph Johnson, Jeremy R. Porter, and Christine Martin, “Disaggregating Mass Public Shootings: A Comparative Analysis of Disgruntled Employee, School, Ideologically Motivated, and Rampage Shooters,” Journal of Forensic Sciences, Vol. 64, No. 3, 2019, pp. 814–823.
Carbone, Paul S., Conrad J. Clemens, and Thomas M. Ball, “Effectiveness of Gun-Safety Counseling and a Gun Lock Giveaway in a Hispanic Community,” Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 159, No. 11, 2005, pp. 1049–1054.
Carter, David L., Homicide Process Mapping: Best Practices for Increasing Homicide Clearances, Tallahassee, Fla.: Institute for Intergovernmental Research, 2013.
Cavanagh, J. T. O., A. J. Carson, M. Sharpe, and S. M. Lawrie, “Psychological Autopsy Studies of Suicide: A Systematic Review,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 33, No. 3, 2003, pp. 395–405.
Cavanaugh, Joseph E., “Unifying the Derivations for the Akaike and Corrected Akaike Information Criteria,” Statistics and Probability Letters, Vol. 33, No. 2, April 1997, pp. 201–208.
Cave, Anthony, “Instead of Buying New Ammunition, These Gun Enthusiasts Recycle,” WAMU: American University Radio, March 5, 2019.
CDC—See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, WONDER data system, undated. As of March 8, 2017: https://wonder.cdc.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Underlying Cause of Death, 1999–2017,” WONDER data system, undated-a. As of July 6, 2019: http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Source of Firearms Used by Students in School-Associated Violent Deaths—United States, 1992–1999,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 50, No. 31, 2001, pp. 657–660.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports, 2001–2014,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., March 28, 2013. As of March 9, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National and Regional, 1999–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., June 24, 2015. As of March 23, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate10_us.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National, Regional, and State 1981–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017a. As of May 8, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Leading Causes of Death Reports, National and Regional, 1999–2015,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017b. As of May 10, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/leadcaus10_us.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports: 2001–2014,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2017c. As of January 15, 2017: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates2001.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Fatal Injury Reports, National, Regional, and State, 1981–2017,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., 2019a. As of July 9, 2019: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/mortrate.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Nonfatal Injury Reports, 2000–2017,” WISQARS database, Atlanta, Ga., January 18, 2019b. As of July 26, 2019: https://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/nfirates.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “WISQARS: Web-Based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System,” web tool, last updated July 1, 2020. As of December 11, 2020: http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars
Chaloupka, Frank J., Lisa M. Powell, and Kenneth E. Warner, “The Use of Excise Taxes to Reduce Tobacco, Alcohol, and Sugary Beverage Consumption,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 40, April 2019, pp. 187–201.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Ayda Yurekli, and Geoffrey T. Fong, “Tobacco Taxes as a Tobacco Control Strategy,” Tobacco Control, Vol. 21, No. 2, 2012, pp. 172–180.
Chang, Ailsa, “Why the AR-15 Is More Than Just a Gun,” NPR, June 24, 2013.
Chapman, S., P. Alpers, K. Agho, and M. Jones, “Australia’s 1996 Gun Law Reforms: Faster Falls in Firearm Deaths, Firearm Suicides, and a Decade Without Mass Shootings,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 6, 2006, pp. 365–372.
Chapman, Simon, Philip Alpers, and Michael Jones, “Association Between Gun Law Reforms and Intentional Firearm Deaths in Australia, 1979–2013,” JAMA, Vol. 316, No. 3, 2016, pp. 291–299.
Chapman, S., M. Stewart, P. Alpers, and M. Jones, “Fatal Firearm Incidents Before and After Australia’s 1996 National Firearms Agreement Banning Semiautomatic Rifles,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 169, No. 1, 2018, pp. 62–64.
Chaudri, V., and J. Geanakoplos, “A Note on the Economic Rationalization of Gun Control,” Economics Letters, Vol. 58, No. 1, 1998, pp. 51–53.
Chauhan, P., M. Cerda, S. F. Messner, M. Tracy, K. Tardiff, and S. Galea, “Race/Ethnic-Specific Homicide Rates in New York City: Evaluating the Impact of Broken Windows Policing and Crack Cocaine Markets,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2011, pp. 268–290.
Cheng, Cheng, and Mark Hoekstra, “Does Strengthening Self-Defense Law Deter Crime or Escalate Violence? Evidence from Expansions to Castle Doctrine,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 48, No. 3, 2013, pp. 821–853.
Cherney, Samantha, Andrew R. Morral, and Terry L. Schell, RAND State Firearm Law Database, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, TL-283-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL283.html
Cherney, Samantha, Andrew R. Morral, Terry L. Schell, and Sierra Smucker, RAND State Firearm Law Database, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, TL-283-1-RC, 2019. As of October 14, 2019: https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL283-1.html
Chesney, Edward, Guy M. Goodwin, and Seena Fazel, “Risks of All‐Cause and Suicide Mortality in Mental Disorders: A Meta‐Review,” World Psychiatry, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2014, pp. 153–160.
Chesnut, Kelsie Y., Melissa Barragan, Jason Gravel, Natalie A. Pifer, Keramet Reiter, Nicole Sherman, and George E. Tita, “Not an ‘Iron Pipeline,’ but Many Capillaries: Regulating Passive Transactions in Los Angeles’ Secondary, Illegal Gun Market,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2017, pp. 226–231.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 4, 2009, pp. 1145–1177.
Choe, J. Y., L. A. Teplin, and K. M. Abram, “Perpetration of Violence, Violent Victimization, and Severe Mental Illness: Balancing Public Health Outcomes,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 2, 2008, pp. 153–164.
Coben, J. H., C. A. Steiner, M. Barrett, C. T. Merrill, and D. Adamson, “Completeness of Cause of Injury Coding in Healthcare Administrative Databases in the United States,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2001, pp. 199–201.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 27, Section 478.11, Meaning of Terms.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 28, Section 25.9, Retention and Destruction of Records in the System.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 38, Section 1.218, Security and Law Enforcement at VA Facilities.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 39, Section 232.1, Conduct on Postal Property.
Cohen, Amy P., Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Rate of Mass Shootings Has Tripled Since 2011, Harvard Research Shows,” Mother Jones, October 15, 2014.
Cohn, Scott, “Remington Rifle Settlement, Including Free Trigger Replacement, Is Official,” CNBC, October 24, 2018.
Cole, David, “Mandatory Firearms Training? What If We Had Mandatory Free Speech Training,” Ammoland: Shooting Sports News, June 13, 2014.
Collazos, D., E. García, D. Mejía, D. Ortega, and S. Tobón, “Hot Spots Policing in a High Crime Environment: An Experimental Evaluation in Medellín,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, February 2020.
Collins, T., R. Greenberg, M. Siegel, Z. Xuan, E. F. Rothman, S. W. Cronin, and D. Hemenway, “State Firearm Laws and Interstate Transfer of Guns in the USA, 2006–2016,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, June 2018, pp. 322–336.
Colquhoun, D., “An Investigation of the False Discovery Rate and the Misinterpretation of p-Values,” Royal Society Open Science, Vol. 1, No. 3, 2014.
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Taber, “Inference with ‘Difference in Differences’ with a Small Number of Policy Changes,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93, No. 1, 2011, pp. 113–125.
Conner, Andrew, Deborah Azrael, Vivian H. Lyons, Catherine Barber, and Matthew Miller, “Validating the National Violent Death Reporting System as a Source of Data on Fatal Shootings of Civilians by Law Enforcement Officers,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 109, No. 4, 2019, pp. 578–584.
Conner, Andrew, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Suicide Case-Fatality Rates in the United States, 2007 to 2014: A Nationwide Population-Based Study,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 171, No. 12, 2019, pp. 885–895.
Conwell, Y., P. R. Duberstein, K. Connor, S. Eberly, C. Cox, and E. D. Caine, “Access to Firearms and Risk for Suicide in Middle-Aged and Older Adults,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2002, pp. 407–416.
Cook, Philip J., “The Saturday Night Special: An Assessment of Alternative Definitions from a Policy Perspective,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 72, No. 4, 1981, pp. 1735–1745.
Cook, Philip J., “The Influence of Gun Availability on Violent Crime Patterns,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 4, 1983, pp. 49–89.
Cook, Philip J., “The Case of the Missing Victims: Gunshot Woundings in the National Crime Survey,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 91–102.
Cook, Philip J., “The Great American Gun War: Notes from Four Decades in the Trenches,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 42, No. 1, 2013, pp. 19–73.
Cook, Philip J., and Anthony A. Braga, “Comprehensive Firearms Tracing: Strategic and Investigative Uses of New Data on Firearms Markets,” Arizona Law Review, Vol. 43, No. 2, 2001, pp. 277–309.
Cook, P. J., A. A. Braga, B. S. Turchan, and L. M. Barao, “Why Do Gun Murders Have a Higher Clearance Rate Than Gunshot Assaults?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 18, No. 3, 2019, pp. 525–551.
Cook, Philip J., and Kristin A. Goss, The Gun Debate: What Everyone Needs to Know, New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.
Cook, P. J., and J. A. Leitzel, “‘Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy’: An Economic Analysis of the Attack on Gun Control,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 59, No. 1, 1996, pp. 91–118.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: Results of a Comprehensive National Survey on Firearms Ownership and Use, Washington, D.C.: Police Foundation, 1996.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America: National Survey on Private Ownership and Use of Firearms: Research in Brief, Rockville, Md.: National Institute of Justice, 1997.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “Defensive Gun Uses: New Evidence from a National Survey,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 14, No. 2, 1998, pp. 111–131.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “The Effect of the Brady Act on Gun Violence,” in B. Harcourt, ed., Guns, Crime, and Punishment in America, New York: New York University Press, 2003, pp. 283–298.
Cook, Philip J., and Jens Ludwig, “The Social Costs of Gun Ownership,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90, No. 1–2, 2006, pp. 379–391.
Cook, P. J., and J. Ludwig, “Policing Guns: Why Gun Violence Is Not (Just) a Public Health Problem,” Items: Insights from the Social Sciences, November 6, 2018.
Cook, Philip J., J. Ludwig, and A. A. Braga, “Criminal Records of Homicide Offenders,” JAMA, Vol. 294, No. 5, 2005, pp. 598–601.
Cook, Philip J., Jens Ludwig, and David Hemenway, “The Gun Debate’s New Mythical Number: How Many Defensive Uses Per Year?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 16, No. 3, 1997, pp. 463–469.
Cook, P. J., J. Ludwig, S. Venkatesh, and A. A. Braga, “Underground Gun Markets,” Economic Journal, Vol. 117, 2007, pp. F558–F888.
Cook, Philip J., Stephanie Molliconi, and Thomas B. Cole, “Regulating Gun Markets,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 86, No. 1, 1995, pp. 59–92.
Cook, Philip J., Susan T. Parker, and Harold A. Pollack, “Sources of Guns to Dangerous People: What We Learn by Asking Them,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015, pp. 28–36.
Cook, P. J., and H. A. Pollack, “Reducing Access to Guns by Violent Offenders,” presented at RSF Journal Conference: The Underground Gun Market, April 2016.
Cook, Philip J., and Harold A. Pollack, “Reducing Access to Guns by Violent Offenders,” Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 5, October 2017, pp. 2–36.
Cook, Philip J., Harold A. Pollack, and Kailey White, Results of the Chicago Inmate Survey of Gun Access and Use, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Crime Lab, January 2018.
Cook, P. J., H. A. Pollack, and K. White, “The Last Link: From Gun Acquisition to Criminal Use,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 96, No. 5, 2019, pp. 784–791.
Cook, Philip J., Ariadne E. Rivera-Aguirre, Magdalena Cerdá, and Garen Wintemute, “Constant Lethality of Gunshot Injuries from Firearm Assault: United States, 2003–2012,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 8, 2017, pp. 1324–1328.
Cooper, Alexia, and Erica L. Smith, Homicide Trends in the United States 1980–2008, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, November 2011.
Cordner, G., and E. P. Biebel, “Problem‐Oriented Policing in Practice,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 2, 2005, pp. 155–180.
Corrigan, P. W., and A. C. Watson, “Findings from the National Comorbidity Survey on the Frequency of Violent Behavior in Individuals with Psychiatric Disorders,” Psychiatry Research, Vol. 136, 2005, pp. 153–162.
Corsaro, N., “More Than Lightning in a Bottle and Far from Ready-Made,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2018, pp. 251–259.
Cox, D. R., and E. J. Snell, Analysis of Binary Data, 2nd ed., New York: Chapman and Hall, 1989.
Cox, Georgina R., Christabel Owens, Jo Robinson, Angela Nicholas, Anne Lockley, Michelle Williamson, Yee Tak Derek Cheung, and Jane Pirkis, “Interventions to Reduce Suicides at Suicide Hotspots: A Systematic Review,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 13, 2013.
Crafton, R. Eliot, Jane G. Gravelle, and William J. Krouse, Guns, Excise Taxes, Wildlife Restoration, and the National Firearms Act, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R45123, March 5, 2018.
Cramer, Clayton E., “Why the FBI’s Justifiable Homicide Statistics Are a Misleading Measure of Defensive Gun Use,” University of Florida Journal of Law and Public Policy, Vol. 27, 2016, pp. 505–514.
Cramer, Clayton E., and David B. Kopel, “‘Shall Issue’: The New Wave of Concealed Handgun Permit Laws,” Tennessee Law Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, 2005, pp. 679–757.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Mitchell L. Doucette, Emma E. McGinty, Daniel W. Webster, and Colleen L. Barry, “Storage Practices of US Gun Owners in 2016,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 108, No. 4, 2018a, pp. 532–537.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Alexander D. McCourt, Marisa D. Booty, and Daniel W. Webster, “Policies to Prevent Illegal Acquisition of Firearms: Impacts on Diversions of Guns for Criminal Use, Violence, and Suicide,” Current Epidemiology Reports, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2019, pp. 238–247.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Molly Merrill-Francis, Alex McCourt, Jon S. Vernick, Garen J. Wintemute, and Daniel W. Webster, “Association Between Firearm Laws and Homicide in Urban Counties,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018b, pp. 383–390.
Crifasi, C. K., J. S. Meyers, J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Effects of Changes in Permit-to-Purchase Handgun Laws in Connecticut and Missouri on Suicide Rates,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015, pp. 43–49.
Crifasi, Cassandra K., Keshia M. Pollack, and Daniel W. Webster, “Effects of State-Level Policy Changes on Homicide and Nonfatal Shootings of Law Enforcement Officers,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2016, pp. 274–278.
Crime Prevention Research Center, “Updated: More Misleading Information from Bloomberg’s Everytown for Gun Safety on Guns: ‘Analysis of Recent Mass Shootings,’ Showing How Mass Public Shootings Keep Occurring in Gun-Free Zones,” September 1, 2014.
Crime Prevention Research Center, “Updated: Mass Public Shootings Keep Occurring in Gun-Free Zones: 94% of Attacks Since 1950,” June 15, 2018a.
Crime Prevention Research Center, “States That Allow Teachers and School Staff to Carry Guns,” October 9, 2018b.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Operations 2013, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2014.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Operations 2014, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2015.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, “National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section Active Records in the NICS Indices,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, December 31, 2016.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, “National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section: Active Records in the NICS Indices as of December 31, 2018,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, December 31, 2018.
Criminal Justice Information Services Division, National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Section: 2018 Operations Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2019.
Csere, M., State Comparison of Gun Permit Fees, Hartford, Conn.: Connecticut General Assembly, Office of Legislative Research, OLR Research Report 2013-R-0048, 2013.
Cummings, P., D. C. Grossman, F. P. Rivara, and T. D. Koepsell, “State Gun Safe Storage Laws and Child Mortality Due to Firearms,” JAMA, Vol. 278, No. 13, 1997a, pp. 1084–1086.
Cummings, P., T. D. Koepsell, D. C. Grossman, J. Savarino, and R. S. Thompson, “The Association Between the Purchase of a Handgun and Homicide or Suicide,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 87, No. 6, 1997b, pp. 974–978.
Curtin, Sally C., Margaret Warner, and Holly Hedegaard, Suicide Rates for Females and Males by Race and Ethnicity: United States, 1999 and 2014, Atlanta, Ga.: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016.
Czyz, Ewa K., Adam G. Horwitz, Daniel Eisenberg, Anne Kramer, and Cheryl A. King, “Self-Reported Barriers to Professional Help Seeking Among College Students at Elevated Risk for Suicide,” Journal of American College Health, Vol. 61, No. 7, 2013, pp. 398–406.
Dahlberg, L. L., R. M. Ikeda, and M. J. Kresnow, “Guns in the Home and Risk of a Violent Death in the Home: Findings from a National Study,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 160, No. 10, 2004, pp. 929–936.
Daigle, M. S., “Suicide Prevention Through Means Restriction: Assessing the Risk of Substitution—A Critical Review,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 37, 2005, pp. 625–632.
de Jager, Elzerie, Eric Goralnick, Justin C. McCarty, Zain G. Hashmi, Molly P. Jarman, and Adil H. Haider, “Lethality of Civilian Active Shooter Incidents With and Without Semiautomatic Rifles in the United States,” JAMA, Vol. 320, No. 10, 2018, pp. 1034–1035.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Feng Liu, “Excise Tax Avoidance: The Case of State Cigarette Taxes,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2013, pp. 1130–1141.
Degeling, M., and B. Berendt, “What Is Wrong About Robocops as Consultants? A Technology-Centric Critique of Predictive Policing,” AI and Society, Vol. 33, No. 3, 2018, pp. 347–356.
Desai, R. A., D. Dausey, and R. A. Rosenheck, “Suicide Among Discharged Psychiatric Inpatients in the Department of Veterans Affairs,” Military Medicine, Vol. 173, No. 8, 2008, pp. 721–728.
DeSimone, Jeff, and Sara Markowitz, The Effect of Child Access Prevention Laws on Non-Fatal Gun Injuries, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 11613, September 2005.
DeSimone, J., S. Markowitz, and J. Xu, “Child Access Prevention Laws and Nonfatal Gun Injuries,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 80, No. 1, 2013, pp. 5–25.
Desmarais, S. L., R. A. Van Dorn, K. L. Johnson, K. J. Grimm, K. S. Douglas, and M. S. Swartz, “Community Violence Perpetration and Victimization Among Adults with Mental Illness,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, 2014, pp. 2342–2349.
Dezhbakhsh, Hashem, and Paul H. Rubin, “Lives Saved or Lives Lost? The Effects of Concealed-Handgun Laws on Crime,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, 1998, pp. 468–474.
Diamond, Peter A., “Consumption Externalities and Imperfect Corrective Pricing,” Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, Vol. 4, No. 2, 1973, pp. 526–538.
Dickey, Jay, and Mark Rosenberg, “How to Protect Gun Rights While Reducing the Toll of Gun Violence,” Washington Post, December 25, 2015.
Díez, Carolina, Rachel P. Kurland, Emily F. Rothman, Megan Bair-Merritt, Eric Fleegler, Ziming Xuan, Sandro Galea, Craig S. Ross, Bindu Kalesan, Kristin A. Goss, and Michael Siegel, “State Intimate Partner Violence–Related Firearm Laws and Intimate Partner Homicide Rates in the United States, 1991 to 2015,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 167, No. 8, 2017, pp. 536–543.
Dixon, L., “Dual Diagnosis of Substance Use in Schizophrenia: Prevalence and Impact on Outcomes,” Schizophrenia Research, Vol. 35, Supp. 1, 1999, pp. S93–S100.
Donohue, John J., “The Impact of Concealed Carry Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 287–341.
Donohue, John J., “Guns, Crime, and the Impact of State Right-to-Carry Laws,” Fordham Law Review, Vol. 73, No. 2, 2004, pp. 623–652.
Donohue, John J., “Laws Facilitating Gun Carrying and Homicide,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 12, 2017, pp. 1864–1865.
Donohue, John J., “More Gun Carrying, More Violent Crime,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2018, pp. 67–82.
Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data, the LASSO, and a State-Level Synthetic Controls Analysis, forthcoming.
Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data and a State-Level Synthetic Control Analysis, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 23510, November 2018.
Donohue, John J., Abhay Aneja, and Kyle D. Weber, “Right-to-Carry Laws and Violent Crime: A Comprehensive Assessment Using Panel Data and a State-Level Synthetic Control Analysis,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2019, pp. 198–247.
Donohue, John J., and Steven D. Levitt, “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 2, 2001, pp. 379–420.
Doob, A. N., and C. M. Webster, “Sentence Severity and Crime: Accepting the Null Hypothesis,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 30, 2003, pp. 143–195.
Draper, Norman R., and Harry Smith, Applied Regression Analysis, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1998.
Duda, M. D., and K. C. Young, Factors Related to Hunting and Fishing Participation in the United States, Harrisonburg, Va.: Responsive Management, report for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Grant # 14–48-0009–92-1252, 1993.
Duggan, Mark, “More Guns, More Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, No. 5, 2001, pp. 1086–1114.
Duggan, Mark, “Guns and Suicide,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 41–73.
Duggan, Mark, Randi Hjalmarsson, and Brian A. Jacob, “The Short-Term and Localized Effect of Gun Shows: Evidence from California and Texas,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93, No. 3, 2011, pp. 786–799.
Duncan, O. D., As Compared to What? Offensive and Defensive Gun Use Surveys, 1973–1994, Rockville, Md.: National Institute of Justice, working paper 185056, 2000a.
Duncan, O. D., “Gun Use Surveys: In Numbers We Trust?” Criminologist, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2000b, pp. 1–6.
Durlauf, S. N., and D. S. Nagin, “Imprisonment and Crime: Can Both Be Reduced?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2011, pp. 13–54.
Durlauf, Steven, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers, “Model Uncertainty and the Effect of Shall-Issue Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime,” European Economic Review, Vol. 81, 2016, pp. 32–67.
Duwe, Grant, “Body-Count Journalism: The Presentation of Mass Murder in the News Media,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 4, No. 4, 2000, pp. 364–399.
Duwe, Grant, “The Patterns and Prevalence of Mass Murder in Twentieth-Century America,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 4, 2004, pp. 729–761.
Duwe, Grant, “The Patterns and Prevalence of Mass Public Shootings in the United States, 1915–2013,” in Laura C. Wilson, ed., The Wiley Handbook of the Psychology of Mass Shootings, West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley and Sons, 2017, pp. 20–35.
Duwe, Grant, “Patterns and Prevalence of Lethal Mass Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 17–35.
Duwe, Grant, Tomislav Kovandzic, and Carlisle E. Moody, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Concealed Firearm Laws on Mass Public Shootings,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2002, pp. 271–296.
Eck, J. E., and W. Spelman, “Who Ya Gonna Call? The Police as Problem-Busters,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 33, No. 1, 1987, pp. 31–52.
Edwards, Griffin, Erik Nesson, Joshua J. Robinson, and Fredrick Vars, “Looking Down the Barrel of a Loaded Gun: The Effect of Mandatory Handgun Purchase Delays on Homicide and Suicide,” Economic Journal, Vol. 128, No. 616, 2018, pp. 3117–3140.
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Tetsuya Saito, “Taxing Guns vs. Taxing Crime: An Application of the ‘Market for Offenses Model,’” Journal of Policy Modeling, Vol. 32, No. 5, 2010, pp. 670–689.
Elbogen, Eric B., and Sally C. Johnson, “The Intricate Link Between Violence and Mental Disorder: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 66, No. 2, February 2009, pp. 152–161.
Elder, Randy W., Briana Lawrence, Aneeqah Ferguson, Timothy S. Naimi, Robert D. Brewer, Sajal K. Chattopadhyay, Traci L. Toomey, Jonathan E. Fielding, and Task Force on Community Preventive Services, “The Effectiveness of Tax Policy Interventions for Reducing Excessive Alcohol Consumption and Related Harms,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 38, No. 2, 2010, pp. 217–229.
Elsass, H. Jaymi, Jaclyn Schildkraut, and Mark C. Stafford, “Studying School Shootings: Challenges and Considerations for Research,” American Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 41, No. 3, 2016, pp. 444–464.
Entman, Robert M., and Kimberly A. Gross, “Race to Judgment: Stereotyping Media and Criminal Defendants,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 71, No. 4, 2008, pp. 93–133.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Shoot First: "Stand Your Ground" Laws and Their Effect on Violent Crime and the Criminal Justice System, New York, 2013.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Innocents Lost: A Year of Unintentional Child Gun Deaths, June 2014.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Strategies for Reducing Gun Violence in American Cities, June 2016.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Be SMART,” webpage, 2017a. As of May 7, 2017: http://besmartforkids.org/
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Mass Shootings in the United States: 2009–2016,” April 11, 2017b.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, “Mass Shootings in the United States: 2009–2017,” December 6, 2018. As of May 15, 2019: http://everytownresearch.org/reports/mass-shootings-analysis/
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, "Ten Years of Mass Shootings in the United States: An Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund Analysis," November 21, 2019. As of June 22, 2020: https://everytownresearch.org/massshootingsreports/mass-shootings-in-america-2009-2019/
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, Mayors Against Illegal Guns, and the National Urban League, Strategies for Reducing Gun Violence in American Cities, June 2016.
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, National Education Association, and American Federation of Teachers, Keeping Our Schools Safe: A Plan to Stop Mass Shootings and End Gun Violence in American Schools, February 11, 2019.
Families Afield, An Initiative for the Future of Hunting, 2010.
Fay, Robert E., and Mamadou S. Diallo, Developmental Estimates of Subnational Crime Rates Based on the National Crime Victimization Survey, Washington, D.C.: Westat, 2015.
Fazel, Seena, Gautam G. Gulati, Louise Linsell, John R. Geddes, and Martin Grann, “Schizophrenia and Violence: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” PLoS Med, Vol. 6, No. 8, August 2009.
FBI—See Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Clearances," webpage, Crime in the United States 2013, 2012. As of April 2, 2020: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2013/crime-in-the-u.s.-2013/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/clearances/clearancetopic_final
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States: 2015, Uniform Crime Reporting Program, 2016a. As of March 8, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 8,” webpage, 2016b. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_8_murder_victims_by_weapon_2011-2015.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 15,” webpage, 2016c. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_15_justifiable_homicide_by_weapon_private_citizen_2011-2015.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Expanded Homicide Data Table 28,” webpage, 2016d. As of May 9, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/leoka/2015/tables/table_28_leos_fk_type_of_weapon_2006-2015.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015: Violent Crime,” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 2016e. As of May 8, 2017: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/violent-crime/violentcrimemain_final.pdf
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Active Records in the NICS Index,” April 30, 2017. As of May 8, 2017: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/active_records_in_the_nics-index.pdf/view
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018a. As of August 1, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/topic-pages/expanded-homicide
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 8: Murder Victims, by Weapon, 2013–2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018b. As of May 13, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-8.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 15: Justifiable Homicide, by Weapon, Private Citizen, 2013–2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018c. As of May 13, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-15.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Table 1: Crime in the United States, by Volume and Rate per 100,000 Inhabitants, 1998–2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018d. As of August 1, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/table-1
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Table 16: Rate: Number of Crimes Per 100,000 Inhabitants, by Population Group, 2017,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2017, 2018e. As of August 1, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/tables/table-16
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 30 Questions and Answers About NIBRS Transition, Washington, D.C., October 2018f.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2016 and 2017, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2018g.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 3: Murder Offenders, by Age, Sex, Race, and Ethnicity, 2018,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2018, 2019a. As of November 18, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-3.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide Data Table 14: Justifiable Homicide, by Weapon, Law Enforcement, 2014–2018,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2018, 2019b. As of November 18, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-14.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Federal Denials: Reasons Why the NICS Section Denies,” webpage, 2019c. As of May 9, 2019: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/federal_denials.pdf/view
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Table 28: Law Enforcement Officers Feloniously Killed, Type of Weapon, 2009–2018,” webpage, Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted, 2019d. As of May 13, 2019: https://ucr.fbi.gov/leoka/2018/tables/table-28.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “2018 National Incident-Based Reporting System: Data Tables,” webpage, 2019e. As of June 19, 2020: https://ucr.fbi.gov/nibrs/2018/tables/data-tables
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Expanded Homicide,” webpage, Crime in the United States 2018, 2019f. As of June 19, 2020: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/topic-pages/expanded-homicide
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2018, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2019g.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Active Shooter Incidents in the United States in 2019, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, April 2020.
Federal Commission on School Safety, Final Report of the Federal Commission on School Safety, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and U.S. Department of Homeland Security, December 18, 2018.
Finkelstein, Amy, “E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, No. 3, 2009, pp. 969–1010.
Firearms News, homepage, undated. As of January 13, 2021: https://www.firearmsnews.com
Fjestad, S. P., Blue Book of Gun Values, 38th ed., Minneapolis, Minn.: Blue Book Publications, 2017.
Fleischer, Victor, “Curb Your Enthusiasm for Pigovian Taxes,” Vanderbilt Law Review, Vol. 68, No. 6, 2015, pp. 1673–1713.
Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “U.S. Mass Shootings, 1982–2017: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, June 14, 2017.
Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “US Mass Shootings, 1982–2019: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, August 31, 2019.
Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “US Mass Shootings, 1982–2020: Data from Mother Jones’ Investigation,” Mother Jones, February 26, 2020.
Fortunato, David, “Can Easing Concealed Carry Deter Crime?” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 96, No. 4, December 2015, pp. 1071–1085.
Fowler, Katherine A., Linda L. Dahlberg, Tadesse Haileyesus, Carmen Gutierrez, and Sarah Bacon, “Childhood Firearm Injuries in the United States,” Pediatrics, Vol. 140, No. 1, 2017.
Fox, A. M., and K. J. Novak, “Collaborating to Reduce Violence: The Impact of Focused Deterrence in Kansas City,” Police Quarterly, Vol. 21, No. 3, 2018, pp. 283–308.
Fox, James Alan, “Missing Data Problems in the SHR: Imputing Offender and Relationship Characteristics,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2004, pp. 214–254.
Fox, James Alan, Uniform Crime Reports (United States): Supplementary Homicide Reports, 1976–1994, Boston, Mass.: Northeastern University, College of Criminal Justice, January 18, 2006.
Fox, James Alan, and Monica J. DeLateur, “Mass Shootings in America: Moving Beyond Newtown,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 125–145.
Fox, James A., and Emma E. Fridel, “The Tenuous Connections Involving Mass Shootings, Mental Illness, and Gun Laws,” Violence and Gender, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2016, pp. 14–19.
Fox, James Alan, and Jack Levin, “Multiple Homicide: Patterns of Serial and Mass Murder,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 23, 1998, pp. 407–455.
Fox, James A., and Jack Levin, Extreme Killing: Understanding Serial and Mass Murder, 3rd ed., Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications, 2015.
Fox, James Alan, and Marc L. Swatt, “Multiple Imputation of the Supplementary Homicide Reports, 1976–2005,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2009, pp. 51–77.
Franklin, Joseph C., Jessica D. Ribeiro, Kathryn R. Fox, Kate H. Bentley, Evan M. Kleiman, Xieyining Huang, Katherine M. Musacchio, Adam C. Jaroszweski, Bernard P. Chang, and Matthew K. Nock, “Risk Factors for Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors: A Meta-Analysis of 50 Years of Research,” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 143, No. 2, 2017, pp. 187–232.
Freed, L. H., D. W. Webster, J. J. Longwell, J. Carrese, and M. H. Wilson, “Factors Preventing Gun Acquisition and Carrying Among Incarcerated Adolescent Males,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 155, 2001, pp. 335–341.
Freedman, David A., “On the So-Called ‘Huber Sandwich Estimator’ and ‘Robust Standard Errors,’” American Statistician, Vol. 60, No. 4, 2006, pp. 299–302.
French, B., and P. J. Heagerty, “Analysis of Longitudinal Data to Evaluate a Policy Change,” Statistics in Medicine, Vol. 27, No. 24, 2008, pp. 5005–5025.
Fridel, Emma E., “A Multivariate Comparison of Family, Felony, and Public Mass Murders in the United States,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 36, No. 3–4, 2017, pp. 1092–1118.
Funk, T. Markus, “Gun Control and Economic Discrimination: The Melting-Point Case-in-Point,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 85, No. 3, 1995, pp. 764–806.
Gehrsitz, Markus, Henry Saffer, and Michael Grossman, The Effect of Changes in Alcohol Tax Differentials on Alcohol Consumption, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 27117, May 2020.
Gelman, Andrew, and John Carlin, “Beyond Power Calculations: Assessing Type S (Sign) and Type M (Magnitude) Errors,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, Vol. 9, No. 6, 2014, pp. 641–651.
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Assault Weapons,” webpage, undated-a. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/hardware-ammunition/assault-weapons/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Browse Gun Laws by State,” webpage, undated-b. As of November 10, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/search-gun-law-by-state/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Categories of Prohibited People,” webpage, undated-c. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/who-can-have-a-gun/categories-of-prohibited-people/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Guns in Schools,” webpage, undated-d. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/guns-in-schools/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Maintaining Records of Gun Sales,” webpage, undated-e. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/gun-sales/maintaining-records-of-gun-sales/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “‘Stand Your Ground’ Laws,” webpage, undated-f. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/stand-your-ground-laws/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Universal Background Checks,” webpage, undated-g. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/background-checks/universal-background-checks/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, “Waiting Periods,” webpage, undated-h. As of October 18, 2017: http://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/gun-sales/waiting-periods/
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, "Location Restrictions," webpage, undated-i. As of January 27, 2020: https://lawcenter.giffords.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/guns-in-public/location-restrictions
Gill, J. R., and M. Pasquale-Styles, “Firearm Deaths by Law Enforcement,” Journal of Forensic Science, Vol. 54, No. 1, 2009, pp. 185–188.
Gilmour, Stuart, Kittima Wattanakamolkul, and Maaya Kita Sugai, “The Effect of the Australian National Firearms Agreement on Suicide and Homicide Mortality, 1978–2015,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 108, No. 11, November 2018, pp. 1511–1516.
Ginwalla, Rashna, Peter Rhee, Randall Friese, Donald J. Green, Lynn Gries, Bellal Joseph, Narong Kulvatunyou, Dafney Lubin, Terence O’Keeffe, Gary Vercruysse, Julie Wynne, and Andrew Tang, “Repeal of the Concealed Weapons Law and Its Impact on Gun-Related Injuries and Deaths,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 76, No. 3, 2014, pp. 569–575.
Gius, Mark, “An Examination of the Effects of Concealed Weapons Laws and Assault Weapons Bans on State-Level Murder Rates,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 21, No. 4, 2014, pp. 265–267.
Gius, Mark, “The Effects of State and Federal Background Checks on State-Level Gun-Related Murder Rates,” Applied Economics, Vol. 47, No. 38, 2015a, pp. 4090–4101.
Gius, Mark, “The Impact of Minimum Age and Child Access Prevention Laws on Firearm-Related Youth Suicides and Unintentional Deaths,” Social Science Journal, Vol. 52, No. 2, 2015b, pp. 168–175.
Gius, Mark, “The Impact of State and Federal Assault Weapons Bans on Public Mass Shootings,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2015c, pp. 281–284.
Gius, Mark, “Effects of Permit-to-Purchase Laws on State-Level Firearm Murder Rates,” Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2017, pp. 73–80.
Gius, Mark, “The Effects of State and Federal Gun Control Laws on School Shootings,” Applied Economics Letters, Vol. 25, No. 5, 2018, pp. 317–320.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Spencer Glendon, “Who Owns Guns? Criminals, Victims, and the Culture of Violence,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, May 1998, pp. 458–462.
Glatt, K. M., “Helpline: Suicide Prevention at a Suicide Site,” Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior, Vol. 17, 1987, pp. 299–309.
Gold, Sharon L., “Why Are Victims of Domestic Violence Still Dying at the Hands of Their Abusers? Filling the Gap in State Domestic Violence Gun Laws,” Kentucky Law Journal, Vol. 91, No. 4, 2003, pp. 935–955.
Good, Phillip I., and James W. Hardin, Common Errors in Statistics (And How to Avoid Them), 4th ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
Goolsbee, Austan, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Joel Slemrod, “Playing with Fire: Cigarettes, Taxes, and Competition from the Internet,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2010, pp. 131–154.
Grambsch, P., “Regression to the Mean, Murder Rates, and Shall-Issue Laws,” American Statistician, Vol. 62, No. 4, 2008, pp. 289–295.
Grant, Bridget F., Frederick S. Stinson, Deborah A. Dawson, S. Patricia Chou, Mary C. Dufour, Wilson Compton, Roger P. Pickering, and Kenneth Kaplan, “Prevalence and Co-Occurrence of Substance Use Disorders and Independent Mood and Anxiety Disorders: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 61, No. 8, 2004, pp. 807–816.
Grassel, K. M., G. J. Wintemute, M. A. Wright, and M. P. Romero, “Association Between Handgun Purchase and Mortality from Firearm Injury,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2003, pp. 48–52.
Greenland, Sander, Mohammad Ali Mansournia, and Douglas G. Altman, “Sparse Data Bias: A Problem Hiding in Plain Sight,” BMJ, Vol. 353, 2016, pp. 1–6.
Grinshteyn, Erin, and David Hemenway, “Violent Death Rates: The US Compared with Other High-Income OECD Countries, 2010,” American Journal of Medicine, Vol. 129, No. 3, March 2016, pp. 266–273.
Groff, E. R., J. H. Ratcliffe, C. P. Haberman, E. T. Sorg, N. M. Joyce, and R. B. Taylor, “Does What Police Do at Hot Spots Matter? The Philadelphia Policing Tactics Experiment,” Criminology, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2015, pp. 21–53.
Grogger, J., “The Effects of Civil Gang Injunctions on Reported Violent Crime: Evidence from Los Angeles County,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 45, No. 1, 2002, pp. 69–90.
Grossman, David C., Peter Cummings, Thomas D. Koepsell, Jean Marshall, Luann D’Ambrosio, Robert S. Thompson, and Chris Mack, “Firearm Safety Counseling in Primary Care Pediatrics: A Randomized, Controlled Trial,” Pediatrics, Vol. 106, No. 1, 2000, pp. 22–26.
Grossman, D. C., B. A. Mueller, C. Riedy, M. D. Dowd, A. Villaveces, J. Prodzinski, J. Nakagawara, J. Howard, N. Thiersch, and R. Harruff, “Gun Storage Practices and Risk of Youth Suicide and Unintentional Firearm Injuries,” JAMA, Vol. 293, No. 6, 2005, pp. 707–714.
Grossman, D. C., D. T. Reay, and S. A. Baker, “Self-Inflicted and Unintentional Firearm Injuries Among Children and Adolescents,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 153, No. 8, 1999, pp. 875–878.
Grossman, David C., Helen A. Stafford, Thomas D. Koepsell, Ryan Hill, Kyla D. Retzer, and Ward Jones, “Improving Firearm Storage in Alaska Native Villages: A Randomized Trial of Household Gun Cabinets,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 102, No. S2, 2012, pp. S291–S297.
Grossman, Richard S., and Stephen A. Lee, “May Issue Versus Shall Issue: Explaining the Pattern of Concealed-Carry Handgun Laws, 1960–2001,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2008, pp. 198–206.
Grunwald, B., and A. V. Papachristos, “Project Safe Neighborhoods in Chicago: Looking Back a Decade Later,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 107, No. 1, 2017, pp. 131–159.
Gu, Jackie, “Deadliest Mass Shootings Are Often Preceded by Violence at Home,” Bloomberg News, June 30, 2020.
Guettabi, Mouhcine, and Abdul Munasib, “Stand Your Ground Laws, Homicides and Gun Deaths,” Regional Studies, Vol. 52, No. 9, 2018, pp. 1250–1260.
Gun Violence Archive, homepage, undated-a. As of June 26, 2020: http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/
Gun Violence Archive, “Mass Shootings,” webpage, undated-b. As of October 25, 2017: http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/reports/mass-shooting
Hahn, Robert A., Oleg Bilukha, Alex Crosby, Mindy T. Fullilove, Akiva Liberman, Eve Moscicki, Susan Snyder, Farris Tuma, and Peter A. Briss, “Firearms Laws and the Reduction of Violence: A Systematic Review,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 28, No. 2, 2005, pp. 40–71.
Hamill, Mark E., Matthew C. Hernandez, Kent R. Bailey, Martin D. Zielinski, Miguel A. Matos, and Henry J. Schiller, “State Level Firearm Concealed-Carry Legislation and Rates of Homicide and Other Violent Crime,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons, Vol. 228, No. 1, 2019, pp. 1–8.
Hanlon, Thomas J., Catherine Barber, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Type of Firearm Used in Suicides: Findings from 13 States in the National Violent Death Reporting System, 2005–2015,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 65, No. 3, 2019, pp. 366–370.
Harlow, Caroline Wolf, Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities: Firearm Use by Offenders, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 189369, November 2001.
Harrell, Erika, Crime Against Persons with Disabilities, 2009–2015—Statistical Tables, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 250632, 2017.
HCUPnet: Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project, web tool, undated. As of October 18, 2019: https://hcupnet.ahrq.gov
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project Fast Stats, “Opioid-Related Hospital Use,” web tool, April 2019. As of November 14, 2019: https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/faststats/OpioidUseServlet
Hedegaard, Holly, Sally C. Curtin, and Margaret Warner, “Suicide Mortality in the United States, 1999–2017,” National Center for Health Statistics Data Brief, No. 330, November 2018.
Helland, E., and A. Tabarrok, “Using Placebo Laws to Test ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2004.
Hemenway, David, “Survey Research and Self-Defense Gun Use: An Explanation of Extreme Overestimates,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 87, No. 4, 1997, pp. 1430–1445.
Hemenway, David, and Deborah Azrael, “The Relative Frequency of Offensive and Defensive Gun Uses: Results from a National Survey,” Violence and Victims, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2000, pp. 257–272.
Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, Andrew Conner, and Matthew Miller, “Variation in Rates of Fatal Police Shootings Across U.S. States: The Role of Firearm Availability,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 96, No. 1, 2019a, pp. 63–73.
Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Gun Use in the United States: Results from Two National Surveys,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2000, pp. 263–267.
Hemenway, David, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Whose Guns Are Stolen? The Epidemiology of Gun Theft Victims,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2017, p. 11.
Hemenway, David, Steven Rausher, Pina Violano, Toby A. Raybould, and Catherine W. Barber, “Firearms Training: What Is Actually Taught?” Injury Prevention, Vol. 25, No. 2, 2019b, pp. 123–128.
Hemenway, David, and Sara J. Solnick, “Children and Unintentional Firearm Death,” Injury Epidemiology, Vol. 2, No. 26, 2015a.
Hemenway, David, and Sara J. Solnick, “The Epidemiology of Self-Defense Gun Use: Evidence from the National Crime Victimization Surveys 2007–2011,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 79, 2015b, pp. 22–27.
Hemenway, David, Sara J. Solnick, and Deborah R. Azrael, “Firearm Training and Storage,” JAMA, Vol. 273, No. 1, 1995, pp. 46–50.
Hempstead, Katherine, and Antonio Rodríguez Andrés, Gun Control and Suicide: The Impact of State Firearm Regulations, 1995–2004, La Paz, Bolivia: Institute for Advanced Development Studies, Development Research Working Paper No. 17/2009, December 2009.
Hennigan, K. M., and D. Sloane, “Improving Civil Gang Injunctions: How Implementation Can Affect Gang Dynamics, Crime, and Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2013, pp. 7–41.
Hepburn, L., D. Azrael, M. Miller, and D. Hemenway, “The Effect of Child Access Prevention Laws on Unintentional Child Firearm Fatalities, 1979–2000,” Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, Vol. 61, No. 2, 2006, pp. 423–428.
Hepburn, Lisa, Matthew Miller, Deborah Azrael, and David Hemenway, “The Effect of Nondiscretionary Concealed Weapon Carrying Laws on Homicide,” Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, Vol. 56, No. 3, 2004, pp. 676–681.
Hernandez, Elizabeth, “At Least 30 Colorado School Districts and Charter Schools Allow Teachers to Carry Guns, but No Statewide Training Standards Regulate Them,” Denver Post, July 8, 2018.
Higgins, Julian P. T., and Sally Green, eds., Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions, Version 5.1.0, London: Cochrane Collaboration, March 2011.
Hines, James R., Jr., “Taxing Consumption and Other Sins,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2007, pp. 49–68.
Hipple, N. K., E. F. McGarrell, M. O’Brien, and B. M. Huebner, “Gun Crime Incident Reviews as a Strategy for Enhancing Problem Solving and Information Sharing,” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 40, No. 1, 2017, pp. 50–67.
Hodur, Nancy M., F. Larry Leistritz, and Kara L. Wolfe, “Developing the Nature-Based Tourism Sector in Southwestern North Dakota,” Great Plains Research: A Journal of Natural and Social Sciences, Vol. 18, Spring 2008, pp. 81–92.
Hoffman, Steven J., and Charlie Tan, “Overview of Systematic Reviews on the Health-Related Effects of Government Tobacco Control Policies,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2015.
Hoskin, Anthony, “Household Gun Prevalence and Rates of Violent Crime: A Test of Competing Gun Theories,” Criminal Justice Studies, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2011, pp. 125–136.
Hoyt, L., and D. Gopal‐Agge, “The Business Improvement District Model: A Balanced Review of Contemporary Debates,” Geography Compass, Vol. 1, No. 4, 2007, pp. 946–958.
Huff‐Corzine, Lin, and Jay Corzine, “The Devil’s in the Details: Measuring Mass Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 317–333.
Huff-Corzine, Lin, James C. McCutcheon, Jay Corzine, John P. Jarvis, Melissa J. Tetzlaff-Bemiller, Mindy Weller, and Matt Landon, “Shooting for Accuracy: Comparing Data Sources on Mass Murder,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 105–124.
Hughes, Karen, Mark A. Bellis, Lisa Jones, Sara Wood, Geoff Bates, Lindsay Eckley, Ellie McCoy, Christopher Mikton, Tom Shakespeare, and Alana Officer, “Prevalence and Risk of Violence Against Adults with Disabilities: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies,” Lancet, Vol. 379, 2012, pp. 1621–1629.
Humphreys, David K., Antonio Gasparrini, and Douglas J. Wiebe, “Evaluating the Impact of Florida’s ‘Stand Your Ground’ Self-Defense Law on Homicide and Suicide by Firearm: An Interrupted Time Series Study,” JAMA Internal Medicine, Vol. 177, No. 1, 2017, pp. 44–50.
Hureau, David M., and Anthony A. Braga, “The Trade in Tools: The Market for Illicit Guns in High-Risk Networks,” Criminology, Vol. 56, No. 3, 2018, pp. 510–545.
IBISWorld, Guns and Ammunition Manufacturing in the U.S.: Market Research Report, Los Angeles, Calif., August 2016.
Ilgen, M. A., K. Zivin, R. J. McCammon, and M. Valenstein, “Mental Illness, Previous Suicidality, and Access to Guns in the United States,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 2, 2008, pp. 198–200.
Institute of Medicine, Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2011.
Ivey, Kay, Governor, “Memorandum: Implementation of the Alabama Sentry Program and the School Safety Training and Compliance Teams,” State of Alabama, May 30, 2018.
Jagodič, Helena Korošec, Tatjana Rokavec, Mark Agius, and Peter Pregelj, “Availability of Mental Health Service Providers and Suicide Rates in Slovenia: A Nationwide Ecological Study,” Croatian Medical Journal, Vol. 54, No. 5, 2013, pp. 444–452.
James, N., Recent Violent Crime Trends in the United States, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R45236, 2018.
Joe, S., S. C. Marcus, and M. S. Kaplan, “Racial Differences in the Characteristics of Firearm Suicide Decedents in the United States,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, Vol. 77, No. 1, 2007, pp. 124–130.
Johnson, R. M., C. Barber, D. Azrael, D. E. Clark, and D. Hemenway, “Who Are the Owners of Firearms Used in Adolescent Suicides?” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 40, No. 6, 2010, pp. 609–611.
Johnston, Jeff, “Can Ammunition ‘Go Bad’?” NRA Family, October 28, 2019.
Jones, Edward D., III, “The District of Columbia’s ‘Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975’: The Toughest Handgun Control Law in the United States—or Is It?” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 455, 1981, pp. 138–149.
Joossens, Luk, and Martin Raw, “From Cigarette Smuggling to Illicit Tobacco Trade,” Tobacco Control, Vol. 21, No. 2, 2012, pp. 230–234.
Joshi, M., and S. B. Sorenson, “Intimate Partner Violence at the Scene: Incident Characteristics and Implications for Public Health Surveillance,” Evaluation Review, Vol. 34, No. 2, 2010, pp. 116–136.
Juodis, Marcus, Andrew Starzomski, Stephen Porter, and Michael Woodworth, “A Comparison of Domestic and Non-Domestic Homicides: Further Evidence for Distinct Dynamics and Heterogeneity of Domestic Homicide Perpetrators,” Journal of Family Violence, Vol. 29, No. 3, 2014, pp. 299–313.
Kagawa, Rose M. C., Alvaro Castillo-Carniglia, Jon S. Vernick, Daniel Webster, Cassandra Crifasi, Kara E. Rudolph, Magdalena Cerdá, Aaron Shev, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Repeal of Comprehensive Background Check Policies and Firearm Homicide and Suicide,” Epidemiology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2018, pp. 494–502.
Kahan, Dan M., “The Politically Motivated Reasoning Paradigm, Part 2: Unanswered Questions,” in Robert Scott and Stephen Kosslyn, eds., Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences, New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2016.
Kahan, Dan M., “On the Sources of Ordinary Science Knowledge and Extraordinary Science Ignorance,” in Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Dan M. Kahan, and Dietram A. Scheufele, eds., Oxford Handbook of the Science of Science Communication, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Kahan, Dan M., E. Peters, E. Dawson, and P. Slovic, “Motivated Numeracy and Enlightened Self-Government,” Behavioural Public Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2017, pp. 54–86.
Kahane, Leo H., “Understanding the Interstate Export of Crime Guns: A Gravity Model Approach,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 31, No. 3, 2013, pp. 618–634.
Kahane, Leo H., “State Gun Laws and the Movement of Crime Guns Between States,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 61, 2020.
Kalesan, Bindu, Kinan Lagast, Marcos Villarreal, Elizabeth Pino, Jeffrey Fagan, and Sandro Galea, “School Shootings During 2013–2015 in the USA,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 23, No. 5, 2017, pp. 321–327.
Kalesan, Bindu, Matthew E. Mobily, Olivia Keiser, Jeffrey A. Fagan, and Sandro Galea, “Firearm Legislation and Firearm Mortality in the USA: A Cross-Sectional, State-Level Study,” Lancet, Vol. 387, No. 10030, April 30, 2016, pp. 1847–1855.
Kann, L., T. McManus, W. A. Harris, S. L. Shanklin, K. H. Flint, J. Hawkins, B. Queen, R. Lowry, E. O. Olsen, D. Chyen, L. Whittle, J. Thornton, C. Lim, Y. Yamakawa, N. Brener, and S. Zaza, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2015,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 65, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1–174.
Kann, Laura, Tim McManus, William A. Harris, Shari L. Shanklin, Katherine H. Flint, Barbara Queen, Richard Lowry, David Chyen, Lisa Whittle, Jemekia Thornton, Connie Lim, Denise Bradford, Yoshimi Yamakawa, Michelle Leon, Nancy Brener, and Kathleen A. Ethier, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2017,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 67, No. 8, 2018, pp. 1–114.
Kaplan, M. S., N. Huguet, B. H. McFarland, and J. A. Mandle, “Factors Associated with Suicide by Firearm Among U.S. Older Adult Men,” Psychology of Men and Masculinity, Vol. 13, No. 1, 2012, pp. 65–74.
Kaplan, M. S., B. H. McFarland, and N. Huguet, “Characteristics of Adult Male and Female Firearm Suicide Decedents: Findings from the National Violent Death Reporting System,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 15, No. 5, 2009, pp. 322–327.
Kapoor, Reena, Elissa Benedek, Richard J. Bonnie, Tanuja Gandhi, Liza Gold, Seth Judd, and Debra A. Pinals, “APA Resource Document on Risk-Based Gun Removal Laws,” Developments in Mental Health Law, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2018, pp. 6–16.
Kapusta, Nestor D., Thomas Niederkrotenthaler, Elmar Etzersdorfer, Martin Voracek, Kanita Dervic, Elisabeth Jandl-Jager, and Gernot Sonneck, “Influence of Psychotherapist Density and Antidepressant Sales on Suicide Rates,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Vol. 119, No. 3, 2009, pp. 236–242.
Kapusta, Nestor D., Martin Posch, Thomas Niederkrotenthaler, Melitta Fischer-Kern, Elmar Etzersdorfer, and Gernot Sonneck, “Availability of Mental Health Service Providers and Suicide Rates in Austria: A Nationwide Study,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 61, No. 12, 2010, pp. 1198–1203.
Kapusta, N. D., U. S. Tran, I. R. Rockett, D. DeLeo, C. P. Naylor, T. Niederkrotenthaler, M. Voracek, E. Etzersdorfer, and G. Sonneck, “Declining Autopsy Rates and Suicide Misclassification: A Cross-National Analysis of 35 Countries,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 68, No. 10, 2011, pp. 1050–1057.
Karp, Aaron, Estimating Global Civilian-Held Firearms Numbers, Geneva: Small Arms Survey, June 2018.
Kawaguchi, Hideaki, and Soichi Koike, “Association Between the Density of Physicians and Suicide Rates in Japan: Nationwide Ecological Study Using a Spatial Bayesian Model,” PLoS One, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2016.
Keller, Thomas Christoph, “ABC’s and AR-15’s: Arming Arkansas’s Teachers,” Arkansas Law Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, 2014, pp. 687–721.
Kellermann, Arthur L., and Frederick P. Rivara, “Silencing the Science on Gun Policy,” JAMA, Vol. 309, No. 6, 2013, pp. 549–550.
Kellermann, A. L., F. P. Rivara, G. Somes, D. T. Reay, J. Francisco, J. G. Banton, J. Prodzinski, C. Fligner, and B. B. Hackman, “Suicide in the Home in Relation to Gun Ownership,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 327, No. 7, 1992, pp. 467–472.
Kelling, G. L., T. Pate, D. Dieckman, and C. E. Brown, The Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment, Washington, D.C.: Police Foundation, 1974.
Kendall, Todd D., and Robert Tamura, “Unmarried Fertility, Crime, and Social Stigma,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2010, pp. 185–221.
Kennedy, D. M., “Pulling Levers: Chronic Offenders, High-Crime Settings, and a Theory of Prevention,” Valparaiso University Law Review, Vol. 31, No. 2, 1996, pp. 449–484.
Kennedy, D. M., “Whither Streetwork: The Place of Outreach Workers in Community Violence Prevention,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2011, pp. 1045–1051.
Kennedy, D. M., A. M. Piehl, and A. A. Braga, “Youth Violence in Boston: Gun Markets, Serious Youth Offenders, and a Use-Reduction Strategy,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 59, No. 1, 1996, pp. 147–196.
Kercher, Cassandra, David I. Swedler, Keshia M. Pollack, and Daniel W. Webster, “Homicides of Law Enforcement Officers Responding to Domestic Disturbance Calls,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 5, 2013, pp. 331–335.
Kessler, Ronald C., Howard Birnbaum, Olga Demler, Ian R. H. Falloon, Elizabeth Gagnon, Margaret Guyer, Mary J. Howes, Kenneth S. Kendler, Lizheng Shi, Ellen Walters, and Eric Q. Wu, “The Prevalence and Correlates of Nonaffective Psychosis in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R),” Biological Psychiatry, Vol. 58, No. 8, 2005, pp. 668–676.
Khan, Khalid S., Regina Kunz, Jos Kleijnen, and Gerd Antes, “Five Steps to Conducting a Systematic Review,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, Vol. 96, No. 3, 2003, pp. 118–121.
Khantzian, E. J., “The Self-Medication Hypothesis of Substance Use Disorders: A Reconsideration and Recent Applications,” Harvard Review of Psychiatry, Vol. 4, No. 5, 1997, pp. 231–244.
Kindy, Kimberly, “FBI to Sharply Expand System for Tracking Fatal Police Shootings,” Washington Post, December 8, 2015.
Kivisto, Aaron J., and Peter L. Phalen, “Effects of Risk-Based Firearm Seizure Laws in Connecticut and Indiana on Suicide Rates, 1981–2015,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 69, No. 8, 2018, pp. 855–862.
Kivisto, Aaron J., Bradley Ray, and Peter L. Phalen, “Firearm Legislation and Fatal Police Shootings in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 7, 2017, pp. 1068–1075.
Klarevas, Louis, Rampage Nation: Securing America from Mass Shootings, Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 2016.
Klarevas, Louis, “Letter to the Editor Re: DiMaggio, C. et al. ‘Changes in US Mass Shooting Deaths Associated with the 1994–2004 Federal Assault Weapons Ban: Analysis of Open-Source Data,’” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 86, No. 5, 2019, pp. 926–928.
Klarevas, Louis, Andrew Conner, and David Hemenway, “The Effect of Large-Capacity Magazine Bans on High-Fatality Mass Shootings, 1990–2017,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 109, No. 12, 2019, pp. 1754–1761.
Kleck, Gary, “Crime Control Through the Private Use of Armed Force,” Social Problems, Vol. 35, No. 1, 1988, pp. 1–21.
Kleck, Gary, Targeting Guns: Firearms and Their Control, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1997.
Kleck, Gary, “Degrading Scientific Standards to Get the Defensive Gun Use Estimate Down,” Journal on Firearms and Public Policy, Vol. 11, 1999, pp. 77–138.
Kleck, Gary, “The Nature and Effectiveness of Owning, Carrying and Using Guns for Self-Protection,” in G. Kleck and D. B. Kates, eds., Armed: New Perspectives on Gun Control, New York: Prometheus Books, 2001.
Kleck, Gary, “Measures of Gun Ownership Levels for Macro-Level Crime and Violence Research,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2004, pp. 3–36.
Kleck, Gary, Point Blank: Guns and Violence in America, New Brunswick, N.J.: AldineTransaction, 2009.
Kleck, Gary, “The Impact of Gun Ownership Rates on Crime Rates: A Methodological Review of the Evidence,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2015, pp. 40–48.
Kleck, Gary, “Large-Capacity Magazines and the Casualty Counts in Mass Shootings: The Plausibility of Linkages,” Justice Research and Policy, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2016, pp. 28–47.
Kleck, Gary, “Response Errors in Surveys of Defensive Gun Use: A National Internet Survey Experiment,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 64, No. 9, 2018, pp. 1119–1142.
Kleck, Gary, Did Australia’s Ban on Semiauto Firearms Really Reduce Violence? A Critique of Chapman et al (2016) Study, Tallahassee, Fla.: Florida State University, working paper, January 12, 2018a.
Kleck, Gary, Do Mass Shooters Favor Using High-Capacity Magazines, Tallahassee, Fla.: Florida State University, working paper, March 10, 2020.
Kleck, G., and D. J. Bordua, “The Factual Foundation for Certain Key Assumptions of Gun Control,” Law and Policy, Vol. 5, No. 3, 1983, pp. 271–298.
Kleck, G., and M. A. DeLone, “Victim Resistance and Offender Weapon Effects in Robbery,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1993, pp. 55–81.
Kleck, Gary, and Marc G. Gertz, “Armed Resistance to Crime: The Prevalence and Nature of Self-Defense with a Gun,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 86, No. 1, 1995, pp. 150–187.
Kleck, Gary, Tomislav Kovandzic, and Mark E. Schaffer, Gun Prevalence, Homicide Rates and Causality: A GMM Approach to Endogeneity Bias, London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper No. 5357, 2005.
Kleck, G., and E. B. Patterson, “The Impact of Gun Control and Gun Ownership Levels on Violence Rates,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1993, pp. 249–287.
Klein, Jessie, The Bully Society: School Shootings and the Crisis of Bullying in America’s Schools, New York: New York University Press, 2012.
Klieve, Helen, Michael Barnes, and Diego De Leo, “Controlling Firearms Use in Australia: Has the 1996 Gun Law Reform Produced the Decrease in Rates of Suicide with This Method?” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 44, No. 4, 2009, pp. 285–292.
Klieve, H., J. Sveticic, and D. De Leo, “Who Uses Firearms as a Means of Suicide? A Population Study Exploring Firearm Accessibility and Method Choice,” BMC Medicine, Vol. 7, 2009.
Klinger, D., R. Rosenfeld, D. Isom, and M. Deckard, “Race, Crime, and the Micro-Ecology of Deadly Force,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 15, No. 1, February 2016, pp. 193–222.
Knicely, John, “One Washington School District Already Has Staff Armed with Guns,” KIRO 7, February 23, 2018.
Knight, Brian, “State Gun Policy and Cross-State Externalities: Evidence from Crime Gun Tracing,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 5, No. 4, 2013, pp. 200–229.
Knittel, Christopher R., and Ryan Sandler, “The Welfare Impact of Second-Best Uniform-Pigouvian Taxation: Evidence from Transportation,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2018, pp. 211–242.
Kochanek, Kenneth D., Sherry L. Murphy, Jiaquan Xu, and Elizabeth Arias, “Deaths: Final Data for 2017,” National Vital Statistics Reports, Vol. 68, No. 9, June 24, 2019.
Koehler, J. J., “The Influence of Prior Beliefs on Scientific Judgments of Evidence Quality,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 56, No. 1, 1993, pp. 28–55.
Kolla, B. P., S. S. O’Connor, and T. W. Lineberry, “The Base Rates and Factors Associated with Reported Access to Firearms in Psychiatric Inpatients,” General Hospital Psychiatry, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2011, pp. 191–196.
Koo, Denise, and Guthrie S. Birkhead, “Prospects and Challenges in Implementing Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance in the United States: Not a Flash in the Pan,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 3, Supp. 1, 1998, pp. 120–124.
Kopel, D. B., “Background Checks for Firearms Sales and Loans: Law, History, and Policy,” Harvard Journal on Legislation, Vol. 53, 2016, pp. 303–367.
Kopel, David B., “Red Flag Laws: Examining Guidelines for State Action,” testimony before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, Washington, D.C., March 26, 2019.
Koper, C. S., “Just Enough Police Presence: Reducing Crime and Disorderly Behavior by Optimizing Patrol Time in Crime Hot Spots,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 12, No. 4, 1995, pp. 649–672.
Koper, Christopher S., “Federal Legislation and Gun Markets: How Much Have Recent Reforms of the Federal Firearms Licensing System Reduced Criminal Gun Suppliers?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 1, No. 2, 2002, pp. 151–178.
Koper, Christopher. S., Crime Gun Risk Factors: Buyer, Seller, Firearm, and Transaction Characteristics Associated with Gun Trafficking and Criminal Gun Use, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 2003.
Koper, Christopher S., Updated Assessment of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban: Impacts on Gun Markets and Gun Violence 1994–2003, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 2004.
Koper, Christopher S., “Crime Gun Risk Factors: Buyer, Seller, Firearm, and Transaction Characteristics Associated with Gun Trafficking and Criminal Gun Use,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 30, No. 2, 2014, pp. 285–315.
Koper, Christopher S., “Assessing the Potential to Reduce Deaths and Injuries from Mass Shootings Through Restrictions on Assault Weapons and Other High‐Capacity Semiautomatic Firearms,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 147–170.
Koper, Christopher S., William D. Johnson, Jordan L. Nichols, Ambrozine Ayers, and Natalie Mullins, “Criminal Use of Assault Weapons and High-Capacity Semiautomatic Firearms: An Updated Examination of Local and National Sources,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018, pp. 313–321.
Koper, C. S., and E. Mayo-Wilson, “Police Crackdowns on Illegal Gun Carrying: A Systematic Review of Their Impact on Gun Crime,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2006, pp. 227–261.
Koper, C. S., E. Mayo-Wilson, and J. Smith, “Police Strategies to Reduce Illegal Possession and Carrying of Firearms: Effects on Gun Crime,” Campbell Systematic Reviews, Vol. 11, 2012.
Koper, Christopher S., and Jeffrey A. Roth, “The Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapon Ban on Gun Violence Outcomes: An Assessment of Multiple Outcome Measures and Some Lessons for Policy Evaluation,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2001, pp. 33–74.
Koper, Christopher S., and Jeffrey A. Roth, “Impact of the 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban on Gun Markets: An Assessment of Short-Term Primary and Secondary Market Effects,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 18, No. 3, 2002, pp. 239–266.
Koper, C. S., D. J. Woods, and B. E. Kubu, “Gun Violence Prevention Practices Among Local Police in the United States,” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and Management, Vol. 36, No. 3, 2013, pp. 577–603.
Koseff, Alexei, “See Where California Is Taking Guns with Restraining Orders,” Sacramento Bee, August 1, 2017.
Kovandzic, Tomislav V., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns and Violent Crime: Crime Control Through Gun Control?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 2, No. 3, 2003, pp. 363–396.
Kovandzic, T. V., T. B. Marvell, and L. M. Vieraitis, “The Impact of ‘Shall-Issue’ Concealed Handgun Laws on Violent Crime Rates—Evidence from Panel Data for Large Urban Cities,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 9, No. 4, 2005, pp. 292–323.
Kovandzic, Tomislav, Mark E. Schaffer, and Gary Kleck, “Estimating the Causal Effect of Gun Prevalence on Homicide Rates: A Local Average Treatment Effect Approach,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2013, pp. 477–541.
Kposowa, A. J., “Association of Suicide Rates, Gun Ownership, Conservatism and Individual Suicide Risk,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 48, No. 9, 2013, pp. 1467–1479.
Kposowa, A., D. Hamilton, and K. Wang, “Impact of Firearm Availability and Gun Regulation on State Suicide Rates,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 46, No. 6, 2016, pp. 678–696.
Kremer, Michael, and Jack Willis, “Guns, Latrines, and Land Reform: Dynamic Pigouvian Taxation,” American Economic Review, Vol. 106, No. 5, 2016, pp. 83–88.
Krouse, W. J., Gun Control: Statutory Disclosure Limitations on ATF Firearms Trace Data and Multiple Handgun Sales Reports, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 7–5700, 2009.
Krouse, William J., and Daniel J. Richardson, Mass Murder with Firearms: Incidents and Victims, 1999–2013, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R44126, 2015.
Kubrin, Charis E., and Tim Wadsworth, “Explaining Suicide Among Blacks and Whites: How Socioeconomic Factors and Gun Availability Affect Race-Specific Suicide Rates,” Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 90, No. 5, 2009, pp. 1203–1227.
Kung, H. C., J. L. Pearson, and X. Liu, “Risk Factors for Male and Female Suicide Decedents Ages 15–64 in the United States—Results from the 1993 National Mortality Followback Survey,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2003, pp. 419–426.
Kung, H. C., J. L. Pearson, and R. Wei, “Substance Use, Firearm Availability, Depressive Symptoms, and Mental Health Service Utilization Among White and African American Suicide Decedents Aged 15 to 64 Years,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 15, No. 8, 2005, pp. 614–621.
Kurtzleben, Danielle, “Fact Check: Are Gun-Makers ‘Totally Free of Liability for Their Behavior’?” NPR, October 6, 2015.
Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera, “Income Inequality and Mass Shootings in the United States,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2019a, article 1147.
Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera, “Social Integration and Mass Shootings in US Counties,” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 42, No. 2, 2019b, pp. 121–139.
Kwon, Roy, and Joseph F. Cabrera, “Socioeconomic Factors and Mass Shootings in the United States,” Critical Public Health, Vol. 29, No. 2, 2019c, pp. 138–145.
La Valle, James M., “Rebuilding at Gunpoint: A City-Level Re-Estimation of the Brady Law and RTC Laws in the Wake of Hurricane Katrina,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 18, No. 4, 2007, pp. 451–465.
La Valle, James M., “Re-Estimating Gun-Policy Effects According to a National Science Academy Report: Were Previous Reports of Failure Premature?” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 33, No. 1, 2010, pp. 71–95.
La Valle, James M., “‘Gun Control’ vs. ‘Self-Protection’: A Case Against the Ideological Divide,” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2013, pp. 1–26.
La Valle, James M., and Thomas C. Glover, “Revisiting Licensed Handgun Carrying: Personal Protection or Interpersonal Liability?” American Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2012, pp. 580–601.
LaFree, G., and C. Birbeck, Controlling New Mexico Juveniles’ Possession of Firearms, Albuquerque, N.M.: New Mexico Criminal Justice Statistical Analysis Center, Working Paper 27, 1998.
Lang, Matthew, “The Impact of Mental Health Insurance Laws on State Suicide Rates,” Health Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1, 2013, pp. 73–88.
Langhinrichsen-Rohling, Jennifer, “Top 10 Greatest ‘Hits’: Important Findings and Future Directions for Intimate Partner Violence Research,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2005, pp. 108–118.
Langhinrichsen-Rohling, Jennifer, Russell E. Palarea, Jennifer Cohen, and Martin L. Rohling, “Breaking Up Is Hard to Do: Unwanted Pursuit Behaviors Following the Dissolution of a Romantic Relationship,” in K. E. Davis, I. H. Frieze, and R. D. Maiuro, eds., Stalking: Perspectives on Victims and Perpetrators, New York: Springer, 2002, pp. 212–236.
Langman, Peter, “Different Types of Role Model Influence and Fame Seeking Among Mass Killers and Copycat Offenders,” American Behavioral Scientist, Vol. 62, No. 2, 2018, pp. 210–228.
Langton, L., Firearms Stolen During Household Burglaries and Other Property Crimes, 2005–2010, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 239436, 2012.
Lankford, Adam, “A Comparative Analysis of Suicide Terrorists and Rampage, Workplace, and School Shooters in the United States from 1990 to 2010,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 17, No. 3, 2013, pp. 255–274.
Lankford, Adam, “Mass Murderers in the United States: Predictors of Offender Deaths,” Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology, Vol. 26, No. 5, 2015, pp. 586–600.
Lankford, Adam, and James Silver, “Why Have Public Mass Shootings Become More Deadly? Assessing How Perpetrators’ Motives and Methods Have Changed over Time,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 37–60.
Laqueur, Hannah S., and Garen J. Wintemute, “Identifying High‐Risk Firearm Owners to Prevent Mass Violence,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 109–127.
Lasley, James R., Using Traffic Barriers to “Design Out” Crime: A Program Evaluation of LAPD’s Operation Cul-de-Sac, Fullerton, Calif.: California State University, Division of Political Science and Criminal Justice, 1996.
Leask, Anna, “Raurimu 20 Years On: The Madman, the Massacre and the Memories,” New Zealand Herald, February 4, 2017.
Lee, Wang-Sheng, and Sandy Suardi, “The Australian Firearms Buyback and Its Effect on Gun Deaths,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 28, No. 1, 2010, pp. 65–79.
Lee, Y. Y., “Gentrification and Crime: Identification Using the 1994 Northridge Earthquake in Los Angeles,” Journal of Urban Affairs, Vol. 32, No. 5, 2010, pp. 549–577.
Lehnen, R., and W. Skogan, The National Crime Survey: Working Papers, Vol. 2: Methodological Studies, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1984.
Leigh, Andrew, and Christine Neill, “Do Gun Buybacks Save Lives? Evidence from Panel Data,” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 12, No. 2, 2010, pp. 509–557.
Levine, Phillip B., and Robin McKnight, “Firearms and Accidental Deaths: Evidence from the Aftermath of the Sandy Hook School Shooting,” Science, Vol. 358, No. 6368, 2017, pp. 1324–1328.
Levine, Phillip B., and Robin McKnight, Not All School Shootings Are the Same and the Differences Matter, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 26728, February 2020.
Lewiecki, E. M., and S. A. Miller, “Suicide, Guns, and Public Policy,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2013, pp. 27–31.
Lexington, “Why the NRA Keeps Talking About Mental Illness, Rather Than Guns,” Economist, March 13, 2013.
Levine, Phillip B., and Robin McKnight, Not All School Shootings Are the Same and the Differences Matter, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 26728, February 2020.
Li, Guohua, Susan P. Baker, Carla DiScala, Carolyn Fowler, Jean Ling, and Gabor D. Kelen, “Factors Associated with the Intent of Firearm-Related Injuries in Pediatric Trauma Patients,” Archives of Pediatric Adolescent Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 11, 1996, pp. 1160–1165.
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger, “Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2014, pp. 302–342.
Li, Z., A. Page, G. Martin, and R. Taylor, “Attributable Risk of Psychiatric and Socio-Economic Factors for Suicide from Individual-Level, Population-Based Studies: A Systematic Review,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 72, No. 4, 2011, pp. 608–616.
Linden, Ariel, and Paul R. Yarnold, “The Australian Gun Buyback Program and Rate of Suicide by Firearm,” Optimal Data Analysis, Vol. 7, March 25, 2018, pp. 28–35.
Lipari, Rachel N., and Eunice Park-Lee, Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States: Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Rockville, Md.: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, August 2019.
Liu, E. C., E. Bagalman, V. S. Chu, and C. S. Redhead, Submission of Mental Health Records to the NICS and the HIPAA Privacy Rule, Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, R43040, 2013.
Liu, Gina, and Douglas J. Wiebe, “A Time-Series Analysis of Firearm Purchasing After Mass Shooting Events in the United States,” JAMA Network Open, Vol. 2, No. 4, 2019.
Loeber, R., and R. Stallings, “Modeling the Impact of Interventions on Local Indicators of Offending, Victimization, and Incarceration,” in R. Loeber and D. P. Farrington, eds., Young Homicide Offenders and Victims: Risk Factors, Prediction, and Prevention from Childhood, New York: Springer, 2011, pp. 137–152.
Loftin, Colin, and Ellen J. MacKenzie, “Building National Estimates of Violent Victimization,” paper presented at the National Research Council Symposium on the Understanding and Control of Violent Behavior, Destin, Fla., April 1–6, 1990.
Loftin, Colin, David McDowall, and Matthew D. Fetzer, “A Comparison of SHR and Vital Statistics Homicide Estimates for U.S. Cities,” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2008, pp. 4–17.
Loftin, C., D. McDowall, B. Wiersema, and T. J. Cottey, “Effects of Restrictive Licensing of Handguns on Homicide and Suicide in the District of Columbia,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 325, No. 23, 1991, pp. 1615–1620.
Logan, J., Holly A. Hill, Michele Lynberg Black, Alex E. Crosby, Debra L. Karch, Jamar D. Barnes, and Keri M. Lubell, “Characteristics of Perpetrators in Homicide-Followed-by-Suicide Incidents: National Violent Death Reporting System—17 U.S. States, 2003–2005,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 168, No. 9, 2008, pp. 1056–1064.
Longo, Daniel, Lock and Load: After Recent Sales Surge, Demand Normalizes as Fears of Gun Control Subside, Los Angeles, Calif., IBISWorld Industry Report 33299a: Guns and Ammunition Manufacturing in the U.S., June 2017.
Lott, John R., Jr., “The Concealed-Handgun Debate,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, January 1998a, pp. 221–243.
Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 1st ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1998b.
Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 2nd ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Lott, John R., Jr., The Bias Against Guns: Why Almost Everything You’ve Heard About Gun Control Is Wrong, Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, Inc., 2003.
Lott, John R., Jr., More Guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun-Control Laws, 3rd ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Lott, John R., Jr., “The FBI’s Misinterpretation of the Change in Mass Public Shootings,” ACJS Today, Vol. 40, No. 2, 2015, pp. 18–29.
Lott, John R., Jr., Concealed Carry Permit Holders Across the United States: 2018, Alexandria, Va.: Crime Prevention Research Center, August 14, 2018.
Lott, John R., Jr., “Schools That Allow Teachers to Carry Guns Are Extremely Safe: Data on the Rate of Shootings and Accidents in Schools That Allow Teachers to Carry,” Alexandria, Va.: Crime Prevention Research Center, April 25, 2019.
Lott, John R., Jr., and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shootings, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Law School, John M. Olin Law and Economics Working Paper No. 73, 1999.
Lott, John R., Jr., and William Landes, “Multiple Victim Public Shootings,” 2000 (unpublished). As of June 29, 2017: http://www.shack.co.nz/pistoltaupo/SSRN_ID272929_code010610560.pdf
Lott, John R., Jr., Carlisle E. Moody, and John E. Whitley, “Re: ‘What Do We Know About the Association Between Firearm Legislation and Firearm-Related Injuries?’” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 184, No. 1, 2016, pp. 81–82.
Lott, John R., Jr., and D. B. Mustard, “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 26, No. 1, 1997, pp. 1–68.
Lott, John R., Florenz Plassmann, and John E. Whitley, “Confirming More Guns, Less Crime,” December 9, 2002.
Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Safe-Storage Gun Laws: Accidental Deaths, Suicides, and Crime,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. 2, 2001, pp. 659–689.
Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Measurement Error in County-Level UCR Data,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 19, No. 2, June 2003, pp. 185–198.
Lott, John R., Jr., and John E. Whitley, “Abortion and Crime: Unwanted Children and Out-of-Wedlock Births,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 45, No. 2, 2007, pp. 304–324.
Lott, John R., Jr., John E. Whitley, and Rebekah C. Riley, Concealed Carry Permit Holders Across the United States, Crime Prevention Research Center, 2016.
Lowe, Sarah R., and Sandro Galea, “The Mental Health Consequences of Mass Shootings,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2017, pp. 62–82.
Lubin, G., N. Werbeloff, D. Halperin, M. Shmushkevitch, M. Weiser, and H. Y. Knobler, “Decrease in Suicide Rates After a Change of Policy Reducing Access to Firearms in Adolescents: A Naturalistic Epidemiological Study,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 40, No. 5, 2010, pp. 421–424.
Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin, The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy, working paper, Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School, 2016.
Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin, “Handgun Waiting Periods Reduce Gun Deaths,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 114, No. 46, 2017, pp. 12162–12165.
Luca, Michael, Deepak Malhotra, and Christopher Poliquin, “The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun Policy,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 181, January 2020.
Ludwig, Jens, “Concealed-Gun-Carrying Laws and Violent Crime: Evidence from State Panel Data,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 18, No. 3, 1998, pp. 239–254.
Ludwig, Jens, “Gun Self-Defense and Deterrence,” Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, Vol. 27, 2000, pp. 363–417.
Ludwig, J., and P. J. Cook, “Homicide and Suicide Rates Associated with Implementation of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act,” JAMA, Vol. 284, No. 5, 2000, pp. 585–591.
Lum, Hillary D., Hanna K. Flaten, and Marian E. Betz, “Gun Access and Safety Practices Among Older Adults,” Current Gerontology and Geriatrics Research, Vol. 2016, 2016, pp. 1–5.
Luo, Michael, and Mike McIntire, “Children and Guns: The Hidden Toll,” New York Times, September 28, 2013.
Luoma, Jason B., Catherine E. Martin, and Jane L. Pearson, “Contact with Mental Health and Primary Care Providers Before Suicide: A Review of the Evidence,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 159, No. 6, 2002, pp. 909–916.
MacDonald, J., D. Golinelli, R. J. Stokes, and R. Bluthenthal, “The Effect of Business Improvement Districts on the Incidence of Violent Crimes,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 16, No. 5, 2010, pp. 327–332.
MacDonald, J., R. J. Stokes, B. Grunwald, and R. Bluthenthal, “The Privatization of Public Safety in Urban Neighborhoods: Do Business Improvement Districts Reduce Violent Crime Among Adolescents?” Law and Society Review, Vol. 47, No. 3, 2013, pp. 621–652.
MacKinnon, James G., and Matthew D. Webb, “Wild Bootstrap Inference for Wildly Different Cluster Sizes,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 32, No. 2, 2017, pp. 233–254.
Madensen, T. D., and J. E. Eck, “Violence in Bars: Exploring the Impact of Place Manager Decision-Making,” Crime Prevention and Community Safety, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2008, pp. 111–125.
Maguire, E. R., C. W. Telep, and T. Abt, “The Effectiveness of Street Outreach Worker Programs for Reducing Violence: A Systematic Review,” Campbell Collaboration, 2018.
Maguire, E. R., C. D. Uchida, and K. D. Hassell, “Problem-Oriented Policing in Colorado Springs: A Content Analysis of 753 Cases,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 61, No. 1, 2015, pp. 71–95.
Maltz, M. D., and J. Targonski, “A Note on the Use of County-Level UCR Data," Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 18, No. 2, 2002, pp. 297–318.
Manning, Willard, “Comment: The Impact of Concealed-Carry Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 331–341.
Manski, Charles F., and John V. Pepper, How Do Right-to-Carry Laws Affect Crime Rates? Coping with Ambiguity Using Bounded-Variation Assumptions, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau for Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 21701, November 2015.
Manski, Charles F., and John V. Pepper, “How Do Right-to-Carry Laws Affect Crime Rates? Coping with Ambiguity Using Bounded-Variation Assumptions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 100, No. 2, 2018, pp. 232–244.
Mares, D., and E. Blackburn, “Evaluating the Effectiveness of an Acoustic Gunshot Location System in St. Louis, MO,” Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2012, pp. 26–42.
Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Public Safety Commission, Initial Report Submitted to the Governor, Speaker of the House of Representatives and Senate President, January 2, 2019.
Marron, Donald B., and Adele C. Morris, How Should Governments Use Revenue from Corrective Taxes? Washington, D.C.: Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, January 2016.
Martin, Robert A., and Richard L. Legault, “Systematic Measurement Error with State-Level Crime Data: Evidence from the ‘More Guns, Less Crime’ Debate,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 42, No. 2, May 2005, pp. 187–210.
Marvell, Thomas B., “The Impact of Banning Juvenile Gun Possession,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 691–713.
Mass Shooting Tracker, homepage, undated. As of June 3, 2020: https://www.massshootingtracker.org
Masters, Kate, “Fear of Other People Is Now the Primary Motivation for American Gun Ownership, a Landmark Survey Finds,” The Trace, September 19, 2016.
Matejkowski, J., J. Fairfax-Columbo, S. W. Cullen, S. C. Marcus, and P. L. Solomon, “Exploring the Potential of Stricter Gun Restrictions for People with Serious Mental Illness to Reduce Homicide in the United States,” Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology, Vol. 25, No. 3, 2014, pp. 362–369.
Matthay, Ellicott C., Jessica Galin, Kara E. Rudolph, Kriszta Farkas, Garen J. Wintemute, and Jennifer Ahern, “In-State and Interstate Associations Between Gun Shows and Firearm Deaths and Injuries: A Quasi-Experimental Study,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 167, No. 12, 2017, pp. 837–844. 
Maxson, C. L., K. M. Hennigan, and D. C. Sloane, “‘It's Getting Crazy Out There’: Can a Civil Gang Injunction Change a Community?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 3, 2005, pp. 577–605.
Mayors Against Illegal Guns, “Access Denied: How the Gun Lobby Is Depriving Police, Policy Makers, and the Public of the Data We Need to Prevent Gun Violence,” Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, 2013.
Mazerolle, L. G., C. Watkins, D. Rogan, and J. Frank, “Using Gunshot Detection Systems in Police Departments: The Impact on Police Response Times and Officer Workloads,” Police Quarterly, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1998, pp. 21–49.
McCarthy, John F., Frederic C. Blow, Rosalinda V. Ignacio, Mark A. Ilgen, Karen L. Austin, and Marcia Valenstein, “Suicide Among Patients in the Veterans Affairs Health System: Rural-Urban Differences in Rates, Risks, and Methods,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 102, No. S1, March 2012, pp. S111–S117.
McClellan, Chandler, and Erdal Tekin, “Stand Your Ground Laws, Homicides, and Injuries,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 52, No. 3, 2017, pp. 621–653.
McClelland, Robert, “New Gun and Ammo Taxes Sound Like Promising Ways to Reduce Gun Violence. But There Are Problems,” Washington, D.C.: Tax Policy Center, Urban Institute and Brookings Institution, May 24, 2018.
McClelland, Robert, and Sarah Gault, The Synthetic Control Method as a Tool to Understand State Policy, Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 2017.
McDonald, J. F., “An Economic Analysis of Guns, Crime, and Gun Control,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1999, pp. 11–19.
McDowall, D., C. Loftin, and S. Presser, “Measuring Civilian Defensive Firearm Use: A Methodological Experiment,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 16, No. 1, 2000, pp. 1–19.
McDowall, D., C. Loftin, and B. Wiersema, “Estimates of the Frequency of Firearm Self Defense from the National Crime Victimization Survey,” Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York, School of Criminal Justice, Violence Research Group Discussion Paper 20, 1998 (unpublished).
McDowall, D., and B. Wiersema, “The Incidence of Defensive Firearm Use by U.S. Crime Victims, 1987 Through 1990,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 84, No. 12, 1994, pp. 1982–1984.
McFarlane, J., J. C. Campbell, S. Wilt, C. Sachs, Y. Ulrich, and X. Xu, “Stalking and Intimate Partner Femicide,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 3, 1999, pp. 300–316.
McGarrell, E. F., “Research Foundations and Implications for Practice,” Department of Justice Journal of Federal Law and Practice, Vol. 66, No. 6, 2018, pp. 3–12.
McGarrell, E. F., N. Corsaro, N. K. Hipple, and T. S. Bynum, “Project Safe Neighborhoods and Violent Crime Trends in US Cities: Assessing Violent Crime Impact,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2010, pp. 165–190.
McGee, K. S., T. Coyne-Beasley, and R. M. Johnson, “Review of Evaluations of Educational Approaches to Promote Safe Storage of Firearms,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 9, No. 2, 2003, pp. 108–111.
McGinty, Emma E., Alene Kennedy-Hendricks, Seema Choksy, and Colleen L. Barry, “Trends in News Media Coverage of Mental Illness in the United States: 1995–2014,” Health Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1121–1129.
McGinty, E. E., D. W. Webster, M. Jarlenski, and C. L. Barry, “News Media Framing of Serious Mental Illness and Gun Violence in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 3, 2014, pp. 406–413.
McPhedran, Samara, “A Systematic Review of Quantitative Evidence About the Impacts of Australian Legislative Reform on Firearm Homicide,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, Vol. 28, 2016, pp. 64–72.
McPhedran, Samara, “An Evaluation of the Impacts of Changing Firearms Legislation on Australian Female Firearm Homicide Victimization Rates,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 24, No. 7, May 2018, pp. 798–815.
McPhedran, Samara, and Jeanine Baker, “Mass Shootings in Australia and New Zealand: A Descriptive Study of Incidence,” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2011.
McPhedran, Samara, and Jeanine Baker, “Lethal and Non-Lethal Violence Against Women in Australia: Measurement Challenges, Conceptual Frameworks, and Limitations in Knowledge,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 18, No. 8, 2012, pp. 958–972.
Mercy, James A., Robin Ikeda, and Kenneth E. Powell, “Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance: An Overview of Progress and the Challenges Ahead,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 3, Supp. 1, 1998, pp. 6–16.
Metzl, J. M., and K. T. MacLeish, “Mental Illness, Mass Shootings, and the Politics of American Firearms,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 2, 2015, pp. 240–249.
Miletich, Steve, “‘Extreme Risk’: Seattle Police Have Seized 43 Guns from People Deemed to Be a Danger Under Year-Old Law,” Seattle Times, May 24, 2018.
Mill, John Stuart, A System of Logic, London: Parker, 1843.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, and C. Barber, “Suicide Mortality in the United States: The Importance of Attending to Method in Understanding Population-Level Disparities in the Burden of Suicide,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 33, 2012, pp. 393–408.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, and D. Hemenway, “Household Firearm Ownership and Suicide Rates in the United States,” Epidemiology, Vol. 13, No. 5, 2002, pp. 517–524.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, and D. Hemenway, “The Epidemiology of Case Fatality Rates for Suicide in the Northeast,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 43, No. 6, 2004, pp. 723–730.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, D. Hemenway, and M. Vriniotis, “Firearm Storage Practices and Rates of Unintentional Firearm Deaths in the United States,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2005, pp. 661–667.
Miller, M., D. Azrael, L. Hepburn, D. Hemenway, and S. J. Lippmann, “The Association Between Changes in Household Firearm Ownership and Rates of Suicide in the United States, 1981–2002,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2006, pp. 178–182.
Miller, M., C. Barber, D. Azrael, D. Hemenway, and B. E. Molnar, “Recent Psychopathology, Suicidal Thoughts and Suicide Attempts in Households With and Without Firearms: Findings from the National Comorbidity Study Replication,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2009, pp. 183–187.
Miller, M., C. Barber, R. A. White, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in the United States: Is Risk Independent of Underlying Suicidal Behavior?” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 178, No. 6, 2013, pp. 946–955.
Miller, M., and D. Hemenway, “The Relationship Between Firearms and Suicide: A Review of the Literature,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, Vol. 4, No. 1, 1999, pp. 59–75.
Miller, M., D. Hemenway, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in the Northeast,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 57, No. 3, 2004, pp. 626–632.
Miller, Matthew, Katherine Hempstead, Tuan Nguyen, Catherine Barber, Sarah Rosenberg-Wohl, and Deborah Azrael, “Method Choice in Nonfatal Self-Harm as a Predictor of Subsequent Episodes of Self-Harm and Suicide: Implications for Clinical Practice,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 6, 2013a, pp. e61–e68.
Miller, M., L. Hepburn, and D. Azrael, “Firearm Acquisition Without Background Checks: Results of a National Survey,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 166, 2017, pp. 233–239.
Miller, M., S. A. Swanson, and D. Azrael, “Are We Missing Something Pertinent? A Bias Analysis of Unmeasured Confounding in the Firearm-Suicide Literature,” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 62–69.
Miller, M., M. Warren, D. Hemenway, and D. Azrael, “Firearms and Suicide in U.S. Cities,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 21, No. E1, 2015, pp. E116–E119.
Milne, John S., Stephen W. Hargarten, Arthur L. Kellermann, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Effect of Current Federal Regulations on Handgun Safety Features,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2003, pp. 1–9.
Mitchell, R. J., “Frequency Versus Duration of Police Patrol Visits for Reducing Crime in Hot Spots: Non-Experimental Findings from the Sacramento Hot Spots Experiment,” Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based Policing, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2017, pp. 22–37.
Molina, J. A., and R. Duarte, “Risk Determinants of Suicide Attempts Among Adolescents,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 65, No. 2, 2006, pp. 407–434.
Monroe, Jeffrey D., Homicide and Gun Control: The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act and Homicide Rates, New York: LFB Scholarly Publishing, 2008.
Monuteaux, M. C., D. Azrael, and M. Miller, “Association of Increased Safe Household Firearm Storage with Firearm Suicide and Unintentional Death Among US Youths,” JAMA Pediatrics, Vol. 173, No. 7, 2019, pp. 657–662.
Monuteaux, M. C., L. K. Lee, D. Hemenway, R. Mannix, and E. W. Fleegler, “Firearm Ownership and Violent Crime in the U.S.: An Ecologic Study,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 49, No. 2, 2015, pp. 207–214.
Moody, Carlisle E., “Testing for the Effects of Concealed Weapons Laws: Specification Errors and Robustness,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 799–813.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 5, No. 3, 2008, pp. 269–293.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Debate on Shall-Issue Laws, Continued,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 6, No. 2, 2009, pp. 203–217.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “On the Choice of Control Variables in the Crime Equation,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 72, No. 5, 2010, pp. 696–715.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws: A Critique of the 2014 Version of Aneja, Donohue, and Zhang,” Econ Journal Watch, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2018a, pp. 51–66.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Clustering and Standard Error Bias in Fixed Effects Panel Data Regressions,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, May 2018b, pp. 1–23.
Moody, Carlisle E., and Thomas B. Marvell, “Clustering and Standard Error Bias in Fixed Effects Panel Data Regressions,” Journal ofQuantitative Criminology, Vol. 36, No. 4, June 2020, pp. 347–369.
Moody, Carlisle E., Thomas B. Marvell, Paul R. Zimmerman, and Fasil Alemante, “The Impact of Right-to-Carry Laws on Crime: An Exercise in Replication,” Review of Economics and Finance, Vol. 4, 2014, pp. 33–43.
Moreno-Küstner, Berta, Carlos Martín, and Loly Pastor, “Prevalence of Psychotic Disorders and Its Association with Methodological Issues: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses,” PLoS One, Vol. 13, No. 4, 2018.
Morral, Andrew R., Terry L. Schell, and Margaret Tankard, The Magnitude and Sources of Disagreement Among Gun Policy Experts, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2088/1-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088z1.html
Moskos, Michelle A., Lenora Olson, Sarah R. Halbern, and Doug Gray, “Utah Youth Suicide Study: Barriers to Mental Health Treatment for Adolescents,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2007, pp. 179–186.
Moyer, R., J. M. MacDonald, G. Ridgeway, and C. C. Branas, “Effect of Remediating Blighted Vacant Land on Shootings: A Citywide Cluster Randomized Trial,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 109, No. 1, 2019, pp. 140–144.
Munasib, Abdul, Genti Kostandini, and Jeffrey L. Jordan, “Impact of the Stand Your Ground Law on Gun Deaths: Evidence of a Rural Urban Dichotomy,” European Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 45, No. 3, 2018, pp. 527–554.
Murder Accountability Project, “Clearance Rates: Uniform Crime Report for Homicides: 1965–2018,” 2019. As of January 24, 2020: http://www.murderdata.org/p/blog-page.html
Murphy v. Guerrero, 2016 U.S. Dist. Northern Mariana Islands, 9th Circuit, September 28, 2016.
Mustard, David B., “The Impact of Gun Laws on Police Deaths,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 635–657.
Musu, Lauren, Anlan Zhang, Ke Wang, Jizhi Zhang, and Barbara A. Oudekerk, Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2018, Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, NCES 2019-047, NCJ 252571, April 2019.
Nagin, D. S., “Deterrence in the Twenty-First Century,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 42, No. 1, 2013, pp. 199–263.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Proactive Policing: Effects on Crime and Communities, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2018.
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, “Resource Guide: Uniform Crime Reporting Program,” webpage, undated. As of October 20, 2019: https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/content/NACJD/guides/ucr.html
National Cancer Institute, The Role of the Media in Promoting and Reducing Tobacco Use, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, No. 07–6242, 2008.
National Conference of State Legislatures, Fiscal Affairs Program, Tax Policy Handbook for State Legislators, 3rd ed., Washington, D.C., February 2010.
National Network for Safe Communities, Group Violence Intervention: An Implementation Guide, Washington, D.C.: Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, 2016.
National Research Council, Understanding and Preventing Violence, A. J. Reiss and J. Roth, eds., Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 1993.
National Research Council, Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2004.
National Research Council, Fairness and Effectiveness in Policing: The Evidence, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2004a.
National Research Council, Estimating the Incidence of Rape and Sexual Assault, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2014.
National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “State Gun Laws,” webpage, undated. As of January 11, 2018: https://www.nraila.org/gun-laws/state-gun-laws
National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “Bloomberg Course Continues Bloomberging Rights Away,” May 24, 2019a.
National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “New Zealand Experience Further Proves Registration Facilitates Confiscations,” July 8, 2019b.
National Shooting Sports Foundation, “Modern Sporting Rifle: Introduction,” webpage, undated. As of October 14, 2019: https://www.nssf.org/msr/
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms Production in the United States, Newtown, Conn., 2015.
National Shooting Sports Foundation, “Project ChildSafe,” webpage, 2016. As of January 10, 2017: http://www.projectchildsafe.org/
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms and Ammunition Industry Economic Impact Report, Newtown, Conn., 2017.
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Firearms and Ammunition Industry Economic Impact Report, Newtown, Conn., 2019.
Nelson, Charles M., Economic Implications of Land Use Patterns for Natural Resource Recreation and Tourism, Lansing, Mich.: Michigan Land Resource Project, Public Sector Consultants, 2001.
Nelson, Jodi L., “The Lautenberg Amendment: An Essential Tool for Combatting Domestic Violence,” North Dakota Law Review, Vol. 75, No. 2, 1999, pp. 365–390.
Nelson, Jon P., “Gender Differences in Alcohol Demand: A Systematic Review of the Role of Prices and Taxes,” Health Economics, Vol. 23, No. 10, 2014, pp. 1260–1280.
Newman, Benjamin J., and Todd K. Hartman, “Mass Shootings and Public Support for Gun Control,” British Journal of Political Science, Vol. 49, No. 4, 2019, pp. 1527–1553.
Niederkrotenthaler, Thomas, Joseph E. Logan, Debra L. Karch, and Alex Crosby, “Characteristics of U.S. Suicide Decedents in 2005–2010 Who Had Received Mental Health Treatment,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 65, No. 3, 2014, pp. 387–390.
Niforatos, Joshua D., Alexander R. Zheutlin, and Richard M. Pescatore, “Public Interest in Gun Control in the USA,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 25, Supp. 1, 2019, pp. i16–i17.
Noar, Seth M., Christina N. Benac, and Melissa S. Harris, “Does Tailoring Matter? Meta-Analytic Review of Tailored Print Health Behavior Change Interventions,” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 133, No. 4, 2007, pp. 673–693.
Nordentoft, Merete, Preben Bo Mortensen, and Carsten Bøcker Pedersen, “Absolute Risk of Suicide After First Hospital Contact in Mental Disorder,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 68, No. 10, October 2011, pp. 1058–1064.
NRC—See National Research Council.
NSSF—See National Shooting Sports Foundation.
Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of Justice, Audit of the Handling of Firearms Purchase Denials Through the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, Washington, D.C., September 2016.
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, OJJDP Statistical Briefing Book, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, May 25, 2016.
Office of the Surgeon General and National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, National Strategy for Suicide Prevention: Goals and Objectives for Action: A Report of the U.S. Surgeon General and of the National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2012.
Olson, David E., and Michael D. Maltz, “Right-to-Carry Concealed Weapon Laws and Homicide in Large U.S. Counties: The Effect on Weapon Types, Victim Characteristics, and Victim-Offender Relationships,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 747–770.
Oslin, D. W., C. Zubritsky, G. Brown, M. Mullahy, A. Puliafico, and T. Ten Have, “Managing Suicide Risk in Late Life: Access to Firearms as a Public Health Risk,” American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2004, pp. 30–36.
O’Sullivan, A., “Gentrification and Crime,” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 57, No. 1, 2005, pp. 73–85.
Owens, David, Judith Horrocks, and Allan House, “Fatal and Non-Fatal Repetition of Self-Harm,” British Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 181, No. 3, 2002, pp. 193–199.
Ozanne-Smith, J., K. Ashby, S. Newstead, V. Z. Stathakis, and A. Clapperton, “Firearm Related Deaths: The Impact of Regulatory Reform,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 10, No. 5, 2004, pp. 280–286.
Palmer, Brian A., V. Shane Pankratz, and John Michael Bostwick, “The Lifetime Risk of Suicide in Schizophrenia: A Reexamination,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 62, No. 3, 2005, pp. 247–253.
Papachristos, A. V., T. L. Meares, and J. Fagan, “Attention Felons: Evaluating Project Safe Neighborhoods in Chicago,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, Vol. 4, No. 2, 2007, pp. 223–272.
Papachristos, A. V., C. M. Smith, M. L. Scherer, and M. A. Fugiero, “More Coffee, Less Crime? The Relationship Between Gentrification and Neighborhood Crime Rates in Chicago, 1991 to 2005,” City and Community, Vol. 10, No. 3, 2011, pp. 215–240.
Papachristos, A. V., C. Wildeman, and E. Roberto, “Tragic, but Not Random: The Social Contagion of Nonfatal Gunshot Injuries,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 125, 2015, pp. 139–150.
Park, Sung-Yeon, Kyle J. Holody, and Xiaoqun Zhang, “Race in Media Coverage of School Shootings: A Parallel Application of Framing Theory and Attribute Agenda Setting,” Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, Vol. 89, No. 3, 2012, pp. 475–494.
Parker, George F., “Circumstances and Outcomes of a Firearm Seizure Law: Marion County, Indiana, 2006–2013,” Behavioral Sciences and the Law, Vol. 33, No. 2-3, 2015, pp. 308–322.
Parker, Kim, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Ruth Igielnik, Baxter Oliphant, and Anna Brown, America’s Complex Relationship with Guns, Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center, June 22, 2017.
Parker, R. N., K. R. Williams, K. J. McCaffree, E. K. Acensio, A. Browne, K. J. Strom, and K. Barrick, “Alcohol Availability and Youth Homicide in the 91 Largest U.S. Cities, 1984–2006,” Drug and Alcohol Review, Vol. 30, No. 5, 2011, pp. 505–514.
Paternoster, R., “The Deterrent Effect of the Perceived Certainty and Severity of Punishment: A Review of the Evidence and Issues,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 4, No. 2, 1987, pp. 173–217.
Penzenstadler, Nick, Ryan J. Foley, and Larry Fenn, “Accidental Shootings Involving Kids Often Go Unpunished,” Associated Press, May 24, 2017.
Pérez-Peña, Richard, “Two New Zealand Mosques, a Hate-Filled Massacre Designed for Its Time,” New York Times, March 15, 2019.
Pescosolido, Bernice A., Bianca Manago, and John Monahan, “Evolving Public Views on the Likelihood of Violence from People with Mental Illness: Stigma and Its Consequences,” Health Affairs, Vol. 38, No. 10, October 2019, pp. 1735–1743.
Petrosky, Emiko, Janet M. Blair, Carter J. Betz, Katherine A. Fowler, Shane P. D. Jack, and Bridget H. Lyons, “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Homicides of Adult Women and the Role of Intimate Partner Violence—United States, 2003–2014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 66, No. 28, 2017, pp. 741–746.
Phillips, C. D., O. Nwaiwu, D. K. McMaughan Moudouni, R. Edwards, and S. Lin, “When Concealed Handgun Licensees Break Bad: Criminal Convictions of Concealed Handgun Licensees in Texas, 2001–2009,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2013, pp. 86–91.
Phillips, J. A., and C. N. Nugent, “Antidepressant Use and Method of Suicide in the United States: Variation by Age and Sex, 1998–2007,” Archives of Suicide Research, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2013, pp. 360–372.
Phipson, Belinda, and Gordon K. Smyth, “Permutation P-Values Should Never Be Zero: Calculating Exact P-Values When Permutations Are Randomly Drawn,” Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2010.
Pierce, Glenn L., Anthony A. Braga, Christopher Koper, Jack McDevitt, David Carlson, Jeffrey Roth, Alan Saiz, Raymond Hyatt, and Roberta E. Griffith, The Characteristics and Dynamics of Crime Gun Markets: Implications for Supply-Side Focused Enforcement Strategies, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 2003.
Pinho, R., and J. Rappa, Special Taxes on Guns, Ammunition, and Gun Shows, Hartford, Conn.: Connecticut General Assembly, Office of Legislative Research, OLR Research Report 2013-r-0034, January 10, 2013.
Pirkola, Sami, Reijo Sund, Eila Sailas, and Kristian Wahlbeck, “Community Mental-Health Services and Suicide Rate in Finland: A Nationwide Small-Area Analysis,” Lancet, Vol. 373, No. 9658, 2009, pp. 147–153.
Piscopo, Kathryn, Rachel N. Lipari, Jennifer Cooney, and Christie Galsheen, Suicidal Thoughts and Behavior Among Adults: Results from the 2015 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, NSDUH Data Review, September 2016.
Piza, E. L., J. M. Caplan, L. W. Kennedy, and A. M. Gilchrist, “The Effects of Merging Proactive CCTV Monitoring with Directed Police Patrol: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2015, pp. 43–69.
Pizarro, Jesenia M., and April M. Zeoli, “An Assessment of the Quality of Homicide Data in the Supplementary Homicide Reports: A Research Note,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 30, No. 4, 2013, pp. 711–731.
Planty, Michael, and Jennifer L. Truman, Firearm Violence, 1993–2011, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 2411730, May 2013.
Plassmann, Florenz, and T. Nicolaus Tideman, “Does the Right to Carry Concealed Handguns Deter Countable Crimes? Only a Count Analysis Can Say,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, No. S2, 2001, pp. 771–798.
Plassmann, F., and J. E. Whitley, “Comments: Confirming ‘More Guns, Less Crime,’” Stanford Law Review, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2003, pp. 1313–1369.
Plumer, Brad, “Everything You Need to Know About the Assault Weapons Ban, in One Post,” Washington Post, December 17, 2012.
Poudyal, N., S. H. Cho, and J. M. Bowker, “Demand for Resident Hunting in the Southeastern United States,” Human Dimensions of Wildlife, Vol. 13, No. 3, 2008, pp. 158–174.
Price, James H., Adam J. Mrdjenovich, and Joseph A. Dake, “Prevalence of State Firearm Mortality and Mental Health Care Resources,” Journal of Community Health, Vol. 34, No. 5, 2009, pp. 383–391.
Price, James H., Amy J. Thompson, and Joseph A. Dake, “Factors Associated with State Variations in Homicide, Suicide, and Unintentional Firearm Deaths,” Journal of Community Health, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2004, pp. 271–283.
Prickett, Kate C., Alexa Martin-Storey, and Robert Crosnoe, “State Firearm Laws, Firearm Ownership, and Safety Practices Among Families of Preschool-Aged Children,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 6, 2014, pp. 1080–1086.
90–618, Gun Control Act of 1968, October 22, 1968.
103–322, Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, 1994.
104–208, Section 658, Gun Ban for Individuals Convicted of a Misdemeanor Crime of Domestic Violence, 1996.
112–74, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012, December 23, 2011.
112–265, Investigative Assistance for Violent Crimes Act of 2012, January 14, 2013.
116–94, Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, December 23, 2019.
Puzzanchera, C., G. Chamberlin, and W. Kang, “Easy Access to the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980–2014,” Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2017.
Puzzanchera, C., G. Chamberlin, and W. Kang, “Easy Access to the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports: 1980–2016,” Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2018.
Raissian, Kerri M., “Hold Your Fire: Did the 1996 Federal Gun Control Act Expansion Reduce Domestic Homicides?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 35, No. 1, Winter 2016, pp. 67–93.
Rajkumar, A. P., E. M. Brinda, A. S. Duba, P. Thangadurai, and K. S. Jacob, “National Suicide Rates and Mental Health System Indicators: An Ecological Study of 191 Countries,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, Vol. 36, No. 5, 2013, pp. 339–342.
RAND Corporation, The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United States, Santa Monica, Calif., RR-2088-RC, 2018. As of March 2, 2018: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088.html
Rangappa, Asha, “The Cost of Freedom: Using the Tax Power to Limit Personal Arsenals,” Yale Law and Policy Review Inter Alia, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2013, pp. 17–24.
Raphael, S., and J. Ludwig, “Prison Sentence Enhancements: The Case of Project Exile,” in S. Raphael and J. Ludwig, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2003, pp. 251–286.
Ratcliffe, J. H., M. Lattanzio, G. Kikuchi, and K. Thomas, “A Partially Randomized Field Experiment on the Effect of an Acoustic Gunshot Detection System on Police Incident Reports,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2019, pp. 67–76.
Reaves, Brian A., Using NIBRS Data to Analyze Violent Crime, Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice Statistics, October 1993.
Reisch, T., T. Steffen, A. Habenstein, and W. Tschacher, “Change in Suicide Rates in Switzerland Before and After Firearm Restriction Resulting from the 2003 ‘Army XXI’ Reform,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 170, No. 9, 2013, pp. 977–984.
Ressler, Robert K., Ann W. Burgess, and John E. Douglas, Sexual Homicide: Patterns and Motives, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988.
Reuter, Peter, and Jenny Mouzos, “Australia: A Massive Buyback of Low-Risk Guns,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 121–156.
Ribeiro, J. D., J. C. Franklin, K. R. Fox, K. H. Bentley, E. M. Kleiman, B. P. Chang, and M. K. Nock, “Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors as Risk Factors for Future Suicide Ideation, Attempts, and Death: A Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 46, No. 2, January 2016, pp. 225–236.
Richmond, Matthew, “With No National Standards, Policies for Arming Teachers Are Often Left to Local School Districts,” Guns & America, March 22, 2019.
Robbins, Mel, “The Real Gun Problem Is Mental Health, Not the NRA,” CNN, 2014.
Roberts, Darryl W., “Intimate Partner Homicide: Relationships to Alcohol and Firearms,” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2009, pp. 67–88.
Roberts, John M., Jr., Aki Roberts, and Tim Wadsworth, “Multiple Imputation for Missing Values in Homicide Incident Data: An Evaluation Using Unique Test Data,” Homicide Studies, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2018, pp. 391–409.
Robinson, Jo, Lay San Too, Jane Pirkis, and Matthew J. Spittal, “Spatial Suicide Clusters in Australia Between 2010 and 2012: A Comparison of Cluster and Non-Cluster Among Young People and Adults,” BMC Psychiatry, Vol. 16, 2016, article 417.
Rockett, Ian R. H., Eric D. Caine, Steven Stack, Hilary S. Connery, Kurt B. Nolte, Christa L. Lilly, Ted R. Miller, Lewis S. Nelson, Sandra L. Putnam, Paul S. Nestadt, and Haomiao Jia, “Method Overtness, Forensic Autopsy, and the Evidentiary Suicide Note: A Multilevel National Violent Death Reporting System Analysis,” PLoS One, Vol. 13, No. 5, May 2018.
Rockett, Ian R. H., Nestor D. Kapusta, and Jeffrey H. Coben, “Beyond Suicide: Action Needed to Improve Self-Injury Mortality Accounting,” JAMA Psychiatry, Vol. 71, No. 3, 2014, pp. 231–232.
Rodway, Cathryn, Sandra Flynn, David While, Mohammed S. Rahman, Navneet Kapur, Louis Appleby, and Jenny Shaw, “Patients with Mental Illness as Victims of Homicide: A National Consecutive Case Series,” Lancet Psychiatry, Vol. 1, No. 2, 2014, pp. 129–134.
Roeder, Oliver, “The Phrase ‘Mass Shooting’ Belongs to the 21st Century,” FiveThirtyEight, January 21, 2016.
Rogers, William H., “Regression Standard Errors in Clustered Samples,” Stata Technical Bulletin, Vol. 13, 1993, pp. 19–23.
Roman, C. G., N. W. Link, J. M. Hyatt, A. Bhati, and M. Forney, “Assessing the Gang-Level and Community-Level Effects of the Philadelphia Focused Deterrence Strategy,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, 2018, pp. 1–29.
Roncek, D. W., and P. A. Maier, “Bars, Blocks, and Crimes Revisited: Linking the Theory of Routine Activities to the Empiricism of ‘Hot Spots,’” Criminology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 1991, pp. 725–753.
Rosenfeld, R., and R. Fornango, “The Impact of Police Stops on Precinct Robbery and Burglary Rates in New York City, 2003–2010,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 1, 2014, pp. 96–122.
Rosenfeld, R., R. Fornango, and E. Baumer, “Did Ceasefire, Compstat, and Exile Reduce Homicide?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 4, No. 3, 2005, pp. 419–449.
Rosengart, M., P. Cummings, A. Nathens, P. Heagerty, R. Maier, and F. Rivara, “An Evaluation of State Firearm Regulations and Homicide and Suicide Death Rates,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 11, No. 2, 2005, pp. 77–83.
Roskam, Kelly, and Vicka Chaplin, “The Gun Violence Restraining Order: An Opportunity for Common Ground in the Gun Violence Debate,” Developments in Mental Health Law, Vol. 36, No. 2, 2017, pp. 1–22.
Rostker, Bernard D., Lawrence M. Hanser, William M. Hix, Carl Jensen, Andrew R. Morral, Greg Ridgeway, and Terry L. Schell, Evaluation of the New York City Police Department Firearm Training and Firearm-Discharge Review Process, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, MG-717-NYPD, 2008. As of October 6, 2019: https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG717.html
Roth, Jeffrey A., and Christopher S. Koper, Impact Evaluation of the Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act of 1994: Final Report, Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 1997.
Roth, Jeffrey A., and Christopher S. Koper, Impacts of the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban: 1994–96, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, March 1999.
Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Deborah Azrael, Vivian H. Lyons, Joseph A. Simonetti, and Matthew Miller, “Loaded Handgun Carrying Among US Adults, 2015,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 12, 2017, pp. 1930–1936.
Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Vivian H. Lyons, Joseph A. Simonetti, Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Formal Firearm Training Among Adults in the USA: Results of a National Survey,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2018, pp. 161–165.
Rowhani-Rahbar, Ali, Joseph A. Simonetti, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Effectiveness of Interventions to Promote Safe Firearm Storage,” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 111–124.
Ruback, R. B., J. N. Shaffer, and V. A. Clark, “Easy Access to Firearms: Juveniles’ Risks for Violent Offender and Violent Victimization,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, Vol. 26, No. 10, 2011, pp. 2111–2138.
Rubin, Paul H., and Hashem Dezhbakhsh, “The Effect of Concealed Handgun Laws on Crime: Beyond the Dummy Variables,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2003, pp. 199–216.
Ruddell, R., and G. L. Mays, “State Background Checks and Firearms Homicides,” Journal of Criminal Justice, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2005, pp. 127–136.
Rudolph, K. E., E. A. Stuart, J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Association Between Connecticut’s Permit-to-Purchase Handgun Law and Homicides,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 8, 2015, pp. E49–E54.
Ruggles, K. V., and S. Rajan, “Gun Possession Among American Youth: A Discovery-Based Approach to Understand Gun Violence,” PLoS One, Vol. 9, No. 11, 2014.
Ryan, R., A. Synnot, and S. Hill, Describing Results, Melbourne: Cochrane Consumers and Communication Group, December 1, 2016.
Sakinofsky, Isaac, “Repetition of Suicidal Behavior,” in K. Hawton and K. P. van Heeringen, eds., The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide, West Sussex, England: John Wiley and Sons, 2000.
Saltzman, Linda E., and Robin M. Ikeda, “Recommended Data Elements for Firearm-Related Injury Surveillance,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 15, No. 3, Supp. 1, 1998, pp. 113–119.
Saltzman, Linda E., James A. Mercy, Patrick W. O’Carroll, Mark L. Rosenberg, and Philip H. Rhodes, “Weapon Involvement and Injury Outcomes in Family and Intimate Assaults,” JAMA, Vol. 267, No. 22, 1992, pp. 3043–3047.
Sanders, Nathan E., and Victor Lei, “The Role of Prior Information in Inference on the Annualized Rates of Mass Shootings in the United States,” Statistics and Public Policy, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2018, pp. 1–8.
Santaella-Tenorio, J., M. Cerdá, A. Villaveces, and S. Galea, “What Do We Know About the Association Between Firearm Legislation and Firearm-Related Injuries?” Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2016, pp. 140–157.
Sarani, Babak, Cheralyn Hendrix, Mary Matecki, Jordan Estroff, Richard L. Amdur, Bryce R. H. Robinson, Geoff Shapiro, Stephen Gondek, Roger Mitchell, and E. Reed Smith, “Wounding Patterns Based on Firearm Type in Civilian Public Mass Shootings in the United States,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons, Vol. 228, No. 3, 2019, pp. 228–234.
Saunders, J., P. Hunt, and J. S. Hollywood, “Predictions Put into Practice: A Quasi-Experimental Evaluation of Chicago’s Predictive Policing Pilot,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016, pp. 347–371.
Saunders, J., A. Ober, D. Barnes-Proby, and R. K. Brunson, “Police Legitimacy and Disrupting Overt Drug Markets,” Policing: An International Journal, Vol. 30, No. 4, 2016, pp. 667–679.
Schaechter, Judy, Isis Duran, Jacqueline De Marchena, Glendene Lemard, and Maria Elena Villar, “Are ‘Accidental’ Gun Deaths as Rare as They Seem? A Comparison of Medical Examiner Manner of Death Coding with an Intent-Based Classification Approach,” Pediatrics, Vol. 111, No. 4, 2003, pp. 741–744.
Schell, Terry L., Beth Ann Griffin, and Andrew R. Morral, Evaluating Methods to Estimate the Effect of State Laws on Firearm Deaths: A Simulation Study, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2685-RC, 2018. As of October 1, 2019: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2685.html
Schell, Terry L., and Andrew R. Morral, Evaluating Methods and Findings from a Study of State Gun Policies, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1642-RC, 2016. As of January 13, 2017: http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1642.html
Schildkraut, Jaclyn, H. Jaymi Elsass, and Kimberly Meredith, “Mass Shootings and the Media: Why All Events Are Not Created Equal,” Journal of Crime and Justice, Vol. 41, No. 3, 2018, pp. 223–243.
Schnebly, Stephen M., “An Examination of the Impact of Victim, Offender, and Situational Attributes on the Deterrent Effect of Defensive Gun Use: A Research Note,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2002, pp. 377–398.
Schnitzer, Patricia G., Heather K. Dykstra, Theodore E. Trigylidas, and Richard Lichenstein, “Firearm Suicide Among Youth in the United States, 2004–2015,” Journal of Behavioral Medicine, Vol. 42, No. 4, 2019, pp. 584–590.
Schnobrich-Davis, J., S. Block, and J. Lupacchino, “Analysis of Herman Goldstein Problem-Oriented Policing Awards from 1993–2017,” Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 2018.
Schorr, Robert A., Paul M. Lukacs, and Justin A. Gude, “The Montana Deer and Elk Hunting Population: The Importance of Cohort Group, License Price, and Population Demographics on Hunter Retention, Recruitment, and Population Change,” Journal of Wildlife Management, Vol. 78, No. 5, 2014, pp. 944–952.
Sen, B., and A. Panjamapirom, “State Background Checks for Gun Purchase and Firearm Deaths: An Exploratory Study,” Preventive Medicine, Vol. 55, No. 4, 2012, pp. 346–350.
Shaffer, J. P., “Multiple Hypothesis Testing,” Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 46, 1995, pp. 561–584.
Shah, S., R. E. Hoffman, L. Wake, and W. M. Marine, “Adolescent Suicide and Household Access to Firearms in Colorado: Results of a Case-Control Study,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2000, pp. 157–163.
Sharkey, P., Uneasy Peace: The Great Crime Decline, the Renewal of City Life, and the Next War on Violence, New York: W. W. Norton, 2018.
Sharkey, P., G. Torrats-Espinosa, and D. Takyar, “Community and the Crime Decline: The Causal Effect of Local Nonprofits on Violent Crime,” American Sociological Review, Vol. 82, No. 6, 2017, pp. 1214–1240.
Shearer, Hannah E., and Allison S. Anderman, “Analyzing Gun-Violence-Prevention Taxes Under Emerging Firearm Fee Jurisprudence,” Southern Illinois University Law Journal, Vol. 43, 2018, pp. 157–192.
Sheley, J. F., and J. D. Wright, Gun Acquisition and Possession in Selected Juvenile Samples, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 1993.
Sheley, J. F., and J. D. Wright, High School Youths, Weapons, and Violence: A National Survey, Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, 1998.
Shenassa, E. D., S. N. Catlin, and S. L. Buka, “Gun Availability, Psychopathology, and Risk of Death from Suicide Attempt by Gun,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 10, No. 7, October 2000, p. 482.
Shenassa, E. D., C. Daskalakis, and S. L. Buka, “Utility of Indices of Gun Availability in the Community,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 60, No. 1, 2006, pp. 44–49.
Shenassa, E. D., M. L. Rogers, K. L. Spalding, and M. B. Roberts, “Safer Storage of Firearms at Home and Risk of Suicide: A Study of Protective Factors in a Nationally Representative Sample,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 58, No. 10, 2004, pp. 841–848.
Sherman, L. W., “Police Crackdowns: Initial and Residual Deterrence,” Crime and Justice, Vol. 12, 1990, pp. 1–48.
Sherman, L. W., P. R. Gartin, and M. E. Buerger, “Hot Spots of Predatory Crime: Routine Activities and the Criminology of Place,” Criminology, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1989, pp. 27–56.
Shi, Wei, and Lung-fei Lee, “The Effects of Gun Control on Crimes: A Spatial Interactive Fixed Effects Approach,” Empirical Economics, Vol. 55, No. 1, 2018, pp. 233–263.
Shumway, Martha, Jennifer Alvidrez, Mark Leary, Deborah Sherwood, Eric Woodard, Emily K. Lee, Heather Hall, Ralph A. Catalano, and James W. Dilley, “Impact of Capacity Reductions in Acute Public-Sector Inpatient Psychiatric Services,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 63, No. 2, 2012, pp. 135–141.
Sidebottom, A., and N. Tilley, “Improving Problem-Oriented Policing: The Need for a New Model?” Crime Prevention and Community Safety, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2011, pp. 79–101.
Sidman, Elanor A., David C. Grossman, Thomas D. Koepsell, Luann D’Ambrosio, John Britt, Evan S. Simpson, Frederick P. Rivara, and Abraham B. Bergman, “Evaluation of a Community-Based Handgun Safe-Storage Campaign,” Pediatrics, Vol. 115, No. 6, 2005, pp. E654–E661.
Siegel, Michael, Molly Pahn, Ziming Xuan, Craig S. Ross, Sandro Galea, Bindu Kalesan, Eric Fleegler, and Kristin A. Goss, “Firearm-Related Laws in All 50 US States, 1991–2016,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 7, 2017a, pp. 1122–1129.
Siegel, Michael, Craig S. Ross, and Charles King, “Examining the Relationship Between the Prevalence of Guns and Homicide Rates in the USA Using a New and Improved State-Level Gun Ownership Proxy,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 20, No. 6, 2014, pp. 424–426.
Siegel, Michael, Ziming Xuan, Craig S. Ross, Sandro Galea, Bindu Kalesan, Eric Fleegler, and Kristin A. Goss, “Easiness of Legal Access to Concealed Firearm Permits and Homicide Rates in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 107, No. 12, 2017b, pp. 1923–1929.
Silva, Jason R., and Joel A. Capellan, “A Comparative Analysis of Media Coverage of Mass Public Shootings: Examining Rampage, Disgruntled Employee, School, and Lone-Wolf Terrorist Shootings in the United States,” Criminal Justice Policy Review, Vol. 30, No. 9, 2019a, pp. 1312–1341.
Silva, Jason R., and Joel A. Capellan, “The Media’s Coverage of Mass Public Shootings in America: Fifty Years of Newsworthiness,” International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2019b, pp. 77–97.
Silver, James, William Fisher, and John Horgan, “Public Mass Murderers and Federal Mental Health Background Checks,” Law and Policy, Vol. 40, No. 2, 2018, pp. 133–147.
Silver, James, Andre Simons, and Sarah Craun, A Study of the Pre-Attack Behaviors of Active Shooters in the United States Between 2000 and 2013, Washington, D.C.: Federal Bureau of Investigation, June 2018.
Simon, Robert I., and Liza H. Gold, “Decreasing Suicide Mortality: Clinical Risk Assessment and Firearm Management,” in Liza H. Gold and Robert I. Simon, eds., Gun Violence and Mental Illness, Arlington, Va.: American Psychiatric Association Publishing, 2016, pp. 249–289.
Simon, T. R., A. C. Swann, K. E. Powell, L. B. Potter, M. Kresnow, and P. W. O’Carroll, “Characteristics of Impulsive Suicide Attempts and Attempters,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, Vol. 32, Supp. 1, 2002, pp. 49–59.
Simonetti, Joseph A., Deborah Azrael, and Matthew Miller, “Firearm Storage Practices and Risk Perceptions Among a Nationally Representative Sample of U.S. Veterans With and Without Self‐Harm Risk Factors,” Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior, Vol. 49, No. 3, 2019, pp. 653–664.
Simonetti, Joseph A., Jessica L. Mackelprang, Ali Rowhani-Rahbar, Douglas Zatzick, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Psychiatric Comorbidity, Suicidality, and in-Home Firearm Access Among a Nationally Representative Sample of Adolescents,” JAMA Psychiatry, Vol. 72, No. 2, 2015, pp. 152–159.
Simonetti, Joseph A., Mary Kay Theis, Ali Rowhani-Rahbar, Evette J. Ludman, and David C. Grossman, “Firearm Storage Practices in Households of Adolescents With and Without Mental Illness,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 61, No. 5, 2017, pp. 583–590.
Skeem, Jennifer, and Edward Mulvey, “What Role Does Serious Mental Illness Play in Mass Shootings, and How Should We Address It?” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 85–108.
Slutkin, G., C. Ransford, and R. B. Decker, “Cure Violence: Treating Violence as a Contagious Disease,” in M. D. Maltz and S. K. Rice, Envisioning Criminology, New York: Springer, 2015, pp. 43–56.
Small Arms Survey, “Annexe 4. The Largest Civilian Firearms Arsenals for 178 Countries,” in Small Arms Survey 2007: Guns and the City, Geneva: Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, August 2007.
Smart, Rosanna, Andrew R. Morral, Sierra Smucker, Samantha Cherney, Terry L. Schell, Samuel Peterson, Sangeeta C. Ahluwalia, Matthew Cefalu, Lea Xenakis, Rajeev Ramchand, and Carole Roan Gresenz, The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United States, 2nd ed., Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-2088-1-RC/AV, 2020. As of March 30, 2020: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2088-1.html
Smart, Rosanna, Andrew R. Morral, and Terry L. Schell, The Magnitude and Sources of Disagreement Among Gun Policy Experts, 2nd ed., Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-A243-3, 2021. As of November 30, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA243-3.html
Smith, N. D., and I. Kawachi, “State-Level Social Capital and Suicide Mortality in the 50 U.S. States,” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 120, 2014, pp. 269–277.
Smith, P. N., J. Currier, and K. Drescher, “Firearm Ownership in Veterans Entering Residential PTSD Treatment: Associations with Suicide Ideation, Attempts, and Combat Exposure,” Psychiatry Research, Vol. 229, No. 1–2, 2015, pp. 220–224.
Smith, Sharon G., Jieru Chen, Kathleen C. Basile, Leah K. Gilbert, Melissa T. Merrick, Nimesh Patel, Margie Walling, and Anurag Jain, The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010–2012 State Report, Atlanta, Ga.: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017.
Smith, Sharon G., Katherine A. Fowler, and Phyllis H. Niolon, “Intimate Partner Homicide and Corollary Victims in 16 States: National Violent Death Reporting System, 2003–2009,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 104, No. 3, 2014, pp. 461–466.
Smith, T. W., and J. Son, Trends in Gun Ownership in the United States, 1972–2014, Chicago, Ill.: NORC at the University of Chicago, March 2015.
Smucker, Sierra, Rose E. Kerber, and Philip J. Cook, “Suicide and Additional Homicides Associated with Intimate Partner Homicide: North Carolina 2004–2013,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 95, No. 3, 2018, pp. 337–343.
Snyder, L. B., and M. A. Hamilton, “A Meta-Analysis of U.S. Health Campaign Effects on Behavior: Emphasize Enforcement, Exposure, and New Information, and Beware the Secular Trend,” in R. C. Hornik, ed., Public Health Communication: Evidence for Behavior Change, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2002, pp. 357–383.
Sorenson, Susan B., “Guns in Intimate Partner Violence: Comparing Incidents by Type of Weapon,” Journal of Women’s Health, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2017, pp. 249–258.
Sorenson, Susan B., and Rebecca A. Schut, “Nonfatal Gun Use in Intimate Partner Violence: A Systematic Review of the Literature,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 19, No. 4, 2018, pp. 431–442.
Southwick Associates, Target Shooting in America, Newtown, Conn.: National Shooting Sports Foundation, 2013.
Spicer, R. S., and T. R. Miller, “Suicide Acts in 8 States: Incidence and Case Fatality Rates by Demographics and Method,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 90, No. 12, 2000, pp. 1885–1891.
Spitzer, Robert J., “Gun Law History in the United States and Second Amendment Rights,” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 80, No. 2, 2017, pp. 55–83.
Stander, V. A., S. M. Hilton, A. P. Doran, A. D. Werbel, and C. J. Thomsen, Department of the Navy Suicide Incident Report (DONSIR): Summary of 1999–2004 Findings, San Diego, Calif.: Naval Health Research Center, 2006.
Stanford Geospatial Center, “Mass Shootings in America,” Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Libraries, undated. As of June 3, 2020: https://library.stanford.edu/projects/mass-shootings-america
Stanford Geospatial Center, “MSA,” GitHub data repository, March 26, 2018. As of December 11, 2020: https://github.com/StanfordGeospatialCenter/MSA
Stark, David E., "Methods and Annotated Code Pertaining to Funding and Publication of Research on Gun Violence and Other Leading Causes of Death," GitHub, January 4, 2017. As of February 1, 2018: https://github.com/davidestark/gun-violence-research
Stark, David E., and Nigam H. Shah, “Funding and Publication of Research on Gun Violence and Other Leading Causes of Death,” JAMA, Vol. 317, No. 1, January 3, 2017, pp. 84–86.
Steadman, Henry J., John Monahan, Debra A. Pinals, Roumen Vesselinov, and Pamela Clark Robbins, “Gun Violence and Victimization of Strangers by Persons with a Mental Illness: Data from the MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 66, No. 11, 2015, pp. 1238–1241.
Steadman, Henry J., Edward P. Mulvey, John Monahan, Pamela Clark Robbins, Paul S. Appelbaum, Thomas Grisso, Loren H. Roth, and Eric Silver, “Violence by People Discharged from Acute Psychiatric Inpatient Facilities and by Others in the Same Neighborhoods,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 55, No. 5, 1998, pp. 393–401.
Stehr, Mark, “Cigarette Tax Avoidance and Evasion,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2005, pp. 277–297.
Stehr, Mark, “The Effect of Sunday Sales Bans and Excise Taxes on Drinking and Cross-Border Shopping for Alcoholic Beverages,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 60, No. 1, 2007, pp. 85–105.
Steidley, Trent Taylor, Movements, Malefactions, and Munitions: Determinants and Effects of Concealed Carry Laws in the United States, dissertation, Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University, 2016.
Steidley, Trent, and Martin T. Kosla, “Toward a Status Anxiety Theory of Macro-Level Firearm Demand,” Social Currents, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2018, pp. 86–103.
Stevens, Marguerite M., Ardis L. Olson, Cecelia A. Gaffney, Tor D. Tosteson, Leila A. Mott, and Pamela Starr, “A Pediatric, Practice-Based, Randomized Trial of Drinking and Smoking Prevention and Bicycle Helmet, Gun, and Seatbelt Safety Promotion,” Pediatrics, Vol. 109, No. 3, 2002, pp. 409–407.
Stevenson, Dru, “The Urgent Need for Legal Scholarship on Firearm Policy,” Buffalo Law Review, Vol. 67, No. 5, 2019, pp. 1449–1506.
Stone, Deborah M., Kristin M. Holland, Lara B. Schiff, and Wendy LiKamWa McIntosh, “Mixed Methods Analysis of Sex Differences in Life Stressors of Middle-Aged Suicides,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 51, No. 5, Supp. 3, 2016, pp. S209–S218.
Stone, Michael H., “Mass Murder, Mental Illness, and Men,” Violence and Gender, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2015, pp. 51–86.
Strnad, Jeff, “Should Legal Empiricists Go Bayesian?” American Law and Economics Review, Vol. 9, No. 1, Spring 2007, pp. 195–303.
Studdert, David M., Yifan Zhang, Jonathan A. Rodden, Rob J. Hyndman, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Handgun Acquisitions in California After Two Mass Shootings,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 166, No. 10, 2017, pp. 698–706.
Studdert, David M., Yifan Zhang, Sonja A. Swanson, Lea Prince, Jonathan A. Rodden, Erin E. Holsinger, Matthew J. Spittal, Garen J. Wintemute, and Matthew Miller, “Handgun Ownership and Suicide in California,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 382, No. 23, 2020, pp. 2220–2229.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Mental Health: Mental Health Detailed Tables, Rockville, Md., 2016.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables, Rockville, Md., 2018.
Sullum, Jacob, “Colorado’s New ‘Red Flag’ Law Illustrates the Pitfalls of Disarming People Based on Their Future Behaviors,” Reason Foundation, April 29, 2019.
Sumner, S. A., P. M. Layde, and C. E. Guse, “Firearm Death Rates and Association with Level of Firearm Purchase Background Check,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 35, No. 1, 2008, pp. 1–6.
Sun, L., G. C. van Kooten, and G. M. Voss, “Demand for Wildlife Hunting in British Columbia,” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 53, No. 1, March 2005, pp. 25–46.
Swahn, M. H., B. Ali, R. M. Bossarte, M. van Dulmen, A. Crosby, A. C. Jones, and K. C. Schinka, “Self-Harm and Suicide Attempts Among High-Risk, Urban Youth in the U.S.: Shared and Unique Risk and Protective Factors,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol. 9, No. 1, 2012, pp. 178–191.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., “Mental Disorder, Substance Abuse, and Community Violence: An Epidemiological Approach,” in J. Monahan and H. Steadman, eds., Violence and Mental Disorder, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 101–136.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michele M. Easter, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Charles M. Belden, Michael A. Norko, Allison G. Robertson, Linda K. Frisman, Hsiu-Ju Lin, Marvin S. Swartz, and George F. Parker, “Criminal Justice and Suicide Outcomes with Indiana's Risk-Based Gun Seizure Law,” Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, Vol. 47, No. 2, 2019, pp. 1–10.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michele M. Easter, Allison G. Robertson, Marvin S. Swartz, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Daniel Moseley, Charles Dion, and John Petrila, “Gun Violence, Mental Illness, and Laws That Prohibit Gun Possession: Evidence from Two Florida Counties,” Health Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 6, 2016, pp. 1067–1075.
Swanson, J. W., C. E. Holzer III, V. K. Ganju, and R. T. Jono, “Violence and Psychiatric Disorder in the Community: Evidence from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Surveys,” Psychiatric Services, Vol. 41, No. 7, 1990, pp. 761–770.
Swanson, J. W., E. E. McGinty, S. Fazel, and V. M. Mays, “Mental Illness and Reduction of Gun Violence and Suicide: Bringing Epidemiologic Research to Policy,” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 25, No. 5, 2015, pp. 366–376.
Swanson, Jeffrey W., Michael A. Norko, Hsiu-Ju Lin, Kelly Alanis-Hirsch, Linda K. Frisman, Madelon V. Baranoski, Michele M. Easter, Allison G. Robertson, Marvin S. Swartz, and Richard J. Bonnie, “Implementation and Effectiveness of Connecticut's Risk-Based Gun Removal Law: Does It Prevent Suicides?” Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 80, No. 2, 2017, pp. 179–208.
Swanson, J. W., A. G. Robertson, L. K. Frisman, M. A. Norko, H. Lin, M. S. Swartz, and P. J. Cook, “Preventing Gun Violence Involving People with Serious Mental Illness,” in D. W. Webster and J. S. Vernick, eds., Reducing Gun Violence in America: Informing Policy with Evidence and Analysis, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013, pp. 33–51.
Swedler, D. I., M. M. Simmons, F. Dominici, and D. Hemenway, “Firearm Prevalence and Homicides of Law Enforcement Officers in the United States,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 105, No. 10, 2015, pp. 2042–2048.
Tark, Jongyeon, and Gary Kleck, “Resisting Crime: The Effects of Victim Action on the Outcomes of Crimes,” Criminology, Vol. 42, No. 4, 2004, pp. 861–909.
Tate, Julie, Jennifer Jenkins, and Steven Rich, “Fatal Force,” Washington Post, March 31, 2019. As of November 18, 2019: https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2018/national/police-shootings-2018/
Taylor, Melanie A., “A Comprehensive Study of Mass Murder Precipitants and Motivations of Offenders,” International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, Vol. 62, No. 2, 2018, pp. 427–449.
Teisl, M. F., K. J. Boyle, and R. E. Record, Jr., “License-Sales Revenues: Understanding Angler and Hunter Reaction to Changes in License Prices,” Human Dimensions of Wildlife, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1999, pp. 1–17.
Teplin, L. A., G. M. McClelland, K. M. Abram, and D. A. Weiner, “Crime Victimization in Adults with Severe Mental Illness: Comparison with the National Crime Victimization Survey,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 62, No. 8, 2005, pp. 911–921.
Thompson, R., V. Kane, J. M. Cook, R. Greenstein, P. Walker, and G. Woody, “Suicidal Ideation in Veterans Receiving Treatment for Opiate Dependence,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Vol. 38, No. 2, 2006, pp. 149–156.
Thomson Healthcare, Ranking America’s Mental Health: An Analysis of Depression Across the States, Washington, D.C.: Mental Health America, 2007.
Tillyer, M. S., R. S. Engel, and B. Lovins, “Beyond Boston: Applying Theory to Understand and Address Sustainability Issues in Focused Deterrence Initiatives for Violence Reduction,” Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 58, No. 6, 2012, pp. 973–997.
Tillyer, M. S., and D. M. Kennedy, “Locating Focused Deterrence Approaches Within a Situational Crime Prevention Framework,” Crime Prevention and Community Safety, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2008, pp. 75–84.
Tita, G. E., A. A. Braga, G. Ridgeway, and G. L. Pierce, “The Criminal Purchase of Firearm Ammunition,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 12, No. 5, 2006, pp. 308–311.
Tondo, Leonardo, Matthew J. Albert, and Ross J. Baldessarini, “Suicide Rates in Relation to Health Care Access in the United States: An Ecological Study,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, Vol. 67, No. 4, 2006, pp. 517–523.
Tritch, Teresa, “Keep Handguns Away from Teenagers,” New York Times, May 30, 2014.
Tyler, T. R., J. Fagan, and A. Geller, “Street Stops and Police Legitimacy: Teachable Moments in Young Urban Men’s Legal Socialization,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, Vol. 11, No. 4, 2014, pp. 751–785.
Uggen, C., and S. McElrath, “Six Social Sources of the U.S. Crime Drop,” Society Pages, February 4, 2013.
Ukert, Benjamin, Elena Andreyeva, and Charles C. Branas, “Time Series Robustness Checks to Test the Effects of the 1996 Australian Firearm Law on Cause-Specific Mortality,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, Vol. 14, No. 2, 2018, pp. 141–154.
United States Code, Title 18, Chapter 44, Firearms.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 921, Definitions.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 922, Unlawful Acts.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 923, Licensing.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 926, Rules and Regulations.
United States Code, Title 18, Section 930, Possession of Firearms and Dangerous Weapons in Federal Facilities.
United States Code, Title 20, Section 7961, Gun-Free Schools Act.
United States Code, Title 26, Section 5801, Imposition of Tax.
United States Code, Title 26, Section 5841, Registration of Firearms.
United States Concealed Carry Association, “Traveling? Know Concealed Carry Permit Info by State,” West Bend, Wisc., August 7, 2013.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Current Employment Statistics (National),” 2017. As of May 15, 2017: https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ceseeb1a.htm
U.S. Census Bureau, Number of Firms, Number of Establishments, Employment, and Annual Payroll by Enterprise Employment Size for the United States, All Industries: 2014, Washington, D.C., December 2016.
U.S. Census Bureau, “U.S. and World Population Clock,” 2017. As of March 22, 2017: https://www.census.gov/popclock/
U.S. Census Bureau, “National Population by Characteristics: 2010–2019,” web tool, June 17, 2020. As of June 20, 2020: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-national-detail.html
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Active Shooter: How to Respond, Washington, D.C., October 2008.
U.S. Department of Justice, “Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 Fact Sheet,” Washington, D.C., October 24, 1994. As of May 30, 2017: https://www.ncjrs.gov/txtfiles/billfs.txt
U.S. Department of Justice, “Department of Justice Awards $1 Million to the National Crime Prevention Council to Support Gun Safety Campaign,” press release, March 7, 2013.
U.S. Department of Labor, Fact Sheet: The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA), Washington, D.C., January 29, 2010. As of October 18, 2017: https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/fact-sheets/mhpaea.pdf
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Hunting License Report, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, May 5, 2015.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 2016 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation, Washington, D.C., FHW/16-NAT, April 2018.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, and U.S. Department of Commerce, 2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation, Washington, D.C., FH2/11-NAT, 2012.
U.S. General Accounting Office, Firearms Purchased from Federal Firearm Licensees Using Bogus Identification, Washington, D.C., GAO-01–427NI, 2001.
U.S. House of Representatives, Gun Violence Prevention and Community Safety Act of 2020, Bill 5717, January 30, 2020.
USA Carry, “Concealed Carry Permit Reciprocity Maps,” webpage, April 20, 2017. As of June 29, 2017: http://www.usacarry.com/concealed_carry_permit_reciprocity_maps.html
van Dijk, Jan, John van Kesteren, and Paul Smit, Criminal Victimisation in International Perspective: Key Findings from the 2004–2005 ICVS and EU ICS, New York: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2007.
Vernick, Jon S., Ted Alcorn, and Joshua Horwitz, “Background Checks for All Gun Buyers and Gun Violence Restraining Orders: State Efforts to Keep Guns from High-Risk Persons,” Journal of Law, Medicine, and Ethics, Vol. 45, Supp. 1, 2017, pp. 98–102.
Vernick, J. S., and L. M. Hepburn, “State and Federal Gun Laws: Trends for 1970–1999,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 345–402.
Vernick, Jon S., Daniel W. Webster, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Effects of Maryland's Law Banning Saturday Night Special Handguns on Crime Guns,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 5, No. 4, 1999, pp. 259–263.
Vespa, Jonathan, Jamie M. Lewis, and Rose M. Kreider, America’s Families and Living Arrangements: 2012, Current Population Reports, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau, P20–570, 2013.
Vigdor, E. R., and J. A. Mercy, “Disarming Batterers: The Impact of Domestic Violence Firearms Laws,” in Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook, eds., Evaluating Gun Policy: Effects on Crime and Violence, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 157–200.
Vigdor, E. R., and J. A. Mercy, “Do Laws Restricting Access to Firearms by Domestic Violence Offenders Prevent Intimate Partner Homicide?” Evaluation Review, Vol. 30, No. 3, 2006, pp. 313–346.
Vince, Joseph J., Timothy Wolfe, and Layton Field, Firearms Training and Self-Defense: Does the Quality and Frequency of Training Determine the Realistic Use of Firearms by Citizens for Self-Defense? Chicago, Ill.: National Gun Victims Action Council, 2015.
Violence Policy Center, “Concealed Carry Killers,” webpage, 2017. As of March 23, 2017: http://concealedcarrykillers.org/
Violence Policy Center, Firearm Justifiable Homicides and Non-Fatal Self-Defense Gun Use: An Analysis of Federal Bureau of Investigation and National Crime Victimization Survey Data, Washington, D.C., September 2018.
The Violence Project, “Mass Shooter Database,” web tool, undated. As of June 8, 2020: https://www.theviolenceproject.org/mass-shooter-database/
Vittes, K. A., and S. B. Sorenson, “Recreational Gun Use by California Adolescents,” Health Education and Behavior, Vol. 32, No. 6, 2005, pp. 751–766.
Vittes, K. A., J. S. Vernick, and D. W. Webster, “Legal Status and Source of Offenders’ Firearms in States with the Least Stringent Criteria for Gun Ownership,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 19, No. 1, June 23, 2012, pp. 26–31.
Vittes, Katherine A., Daniel W. Webster, Shannon Frattaroli, Barbara E. Claire, and Garen J. Wintemute, “Removing Guns from Batterers: Findings from a Pilot Survey of Domestic Violence Restraining Order Recipients in California,” Violence Against Women, Vol. 19, No. 5, 2013, pp. 602–616.
Vyrostek, S. B., J. L. Annest, and G. W. Ryan, “Surveillance for Fatal and Nonfatal Injuries—United States, 2001,” MMWR Surveillance Summary, Vol. 53, 2004, pp. 1–57.
Wadsworth, T., C. E. Kubrin, and J. R. Herting, “Investigating the Rise (and Fall) of Young Black Male Suicide in the United States, 1982–2001,” Journal of African American Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2014, pp. 72–91.
Wadsworth, Tim, and John M. Roberts, Jr., “When Missing Data Are Not Missing: A New Approach to Evaluating Supplemental Homicide Report Imputation Strategies,” Criminology, Vol. 46, No. 4, 2008, pp. 841–870.
Wagenaar, Alexander C., Matthew J. Salois, and Kelli A. Komro, “Effects of Beverage Alcohol Price and Tax Levels on Drinking: A Meta‐Analysis of 1003 Estimates from 112 Studies,” Addiction, Vol. 104, No. 2, 2009, pp. 179–190.
Wallace, Lacey N., “Castle Doctrine Legislation: Unintended Effects for Gun Ownership?” Justice Policy Journal, Vol. 11, No. 2, Fall 2014.
Wang, N., L. Liu, and J. E. Eck, “Analyzing Crime Displacement with a Simulation Approach,” Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, Vol. 41, No. 2, 2014, pp. 359–374.
Warburton, A. L., and J. P. Shepherd, “Tackling Alcohol Related Violence in City Centres: Effect of Emergency Medicine and Police Intervention,” Emergency Medicine Journal, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2006, pp. 12–17.
Watkins, Adam M., Beth M. Huebner, and Scott H. Decker, “Patterns of Gun Acquisition, Carrying, and Use Among Juvenile and Adult Arrestees: Evidence from a High‐Crime City,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 4, 2008, pp. 674–700.
Watkins, Adam M., and Alan J. Lizotte, “Does Household Gun Access Increase the Risk of Attempted Suicide? Evidence from a National Sample of Adolescents,” Youth and Society, Vol. 45, No. 3, 2013, pp. 324–346.
Webster, D., C. K. Crifasi, and J. S. Vernick, “Effects of the Repeal of Missouri’s Handgun Purchaser Licensing Law on Homicides,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 91, No. 2, 2014, pp. 293–302.
Webster, D. W., L. H. Freed, S. Frattaroli, and M. H. Wilson, “How Delinquent Youths Acquire Guns: Initial Versus Most Recent Gun Acquisitions,” Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 79, No. 1, 2002, pp. 60–69.
Webster, Daniel W., Alexander D. McCourt, Cassandra K. Crifasi, Marisa D. Booty, and Elizabeth A. Stuart, “Evidence Concerning the Regulation of Firearms Design, Sale, and Carrying on Fatal Mass Shootings in the United States,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 171–212.
Webster, Daniel W., and Marc Starnes, “Reexamining the Association Between Child Access Prevention Gun Laws and Unintentional Shooting Deaths of Children,” Pediatrics, Vol. 106, No. 6, 2000, pp. 1466–1469.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Maria T. Bulzacchelli, “Effects of State-Level Firearm Seller Accountability Policies on Firearm Trafficking,” Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine, Vol. 86, No. 4, 2009, pp. 525–537.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Relationship Between Licensing, Registration, and Other Gun Sales Laws and the Source State of Crime Guns,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 7, 2001, pp. 184–189.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, and Lisa M. Hepburn, “Effects of Maryland's Law Banning ‘Saturday Night Special’ Handguns on Homicides,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 155, No. 5, 2002, pp. 406–412.
Webster, Daniel W., Jon S. Vernick, Emma E. McGinty, and Ted Alcorn, “Preventing the Diversion of Guns to Criminals Through Effective Firearm Sales Laws,” in Daniel W. Webster and Jon S. Vernick, eds., Reducing Gun Violence in America: Informing Policy with Evidence and Analysis, Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013, pp. 109–121.
Webster, D. W., J. S. Vernick, A. M. Zeoli, and J. A. Manganello, “Association Between Youth-Focused Firearm Laws and Youth Suicides,” JAMA, Vol. 292, No. 5, 2004, pp. 594–601.
Webster, D. W., and G. J. Wintemute, “Effects of Policies Designed to Keep Firearms from High-Risk Individuals,” Annual Review of Public Health, Vol. 36, 2015, pp. 21–37.
Weil, Douglas S., and Rebecca C. Knox, “Effects of Limiting Handgun Purchase on Interstate Transfer of Firearms,” JAMA, Vol. 275, No. 22, 1996, pp. 1759–1761.
Weisburd, D., S. Bushway, C. Lum, and S.-M. Yang, “Trajectories of Crime at Places: A Longitudinal Study of Street Segments in the City of Seattle,” Criminology, Vol. 42, No. 2, 2004, pp. 283–321.
Weisburd, D., and J. E. Eck, “What Can Police Do to Reduce Crime, Disorder, and Fear?” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 593, No. 1, 2004, pp. 42–65.
Welsh, B. C., and D. P. Farrington, “Public Area CCTV and Crime Prevention: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis,” Justice Quarterly, Vol. 26, 2009, pp. 716–745.
Wiebe, Douglas J., “Homicide and Suicide Risks Associated with Firearms in the Home: A National Case-Control Study,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 41, No. 6, 2003, pp. 771–782.
WikiArms, homepage, undated. As of December 11, 2020: https://www.wikiarms.com
Wilcox, P., and J. E. Eck, “Criminology of the Unpopular: Implications for Policy Aimed at Payday Lending Facilities,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2011, pp. 473–482.
Wintemute, Garen J., Ring of Fire: The Handgun Makers of Southern California, Sacramento, Calif.: Violence Prevention Research Program, 1994.
Wintemute, Garen J., Marian E. Betz, and Megan L. Ranney, “Yes, You Can: Physicians, Patients, and Firearms,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 165, No. 3, 2016, pp. 205–213.
Wintemute, G. J., D. Hemenway, D. Webster, G. Pierce, and A. A. Braga, “Gun Shows and Gun Violence: Fatally Flawed Study Yields Misleading Results,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 100, No. 10, 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
Wintemute, G. J., C. A. Parham, J. J. Beaumont, M. Wright, and C. Drake, “Mortality Among Recent Purchasers of Handguns,” New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 341, No. 21, 1999, pp. 1583–1589.
Wintemute, Garen J., Carrie A. Parham, Mona A. Wright, James J. Beaumont, and Christiana M. Drake, “Weapons of Choice: Previous Criminal History, Later Criminal Activity, and Firearm Preference Among Legally Authorized Young Adult Purchasers of Handguns,” Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care, Vol. 44, No. 1, 1998, pp. 155–160.
Wintemute, Garen J., Veronica A. Pear, Julia P. Schleimer, Rocco Pallin, Sydney Sohl, Nicole Kravitz-Wirtz, and Elizabeth A. Tomsich, “Extreme Risk Protection Orders Intended to Prevent Mass Shootings: A Case Series,” Annals of Internal Medicine, August 2019.
Wooldridge, J. M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002.
World Health Organization, Preventing Suicide: A Global Imperative, Geneva, 2014.
World Health Organization, World Health Organization Mortality Database, Geneva, 2017. As of October 13, 2017: http://apps.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality/causeofdeath_query/start.php
Wright, Alexandra, Katherine E. Smith, and Mark Hellowell, “Policy Lessons from Health Taxes: A Systematic Review of Empirical Studies,” BMC Public Health, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2017.
Wright, James D., and Peter H. Rossi, Armed and Considered Dangerous: A Survey of Felons and Their Firearms, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1986.
Wright, M. A., and G. J. Wintemute, “Felonious or Violent Criminal Activity that Prohibits Gun Ownership Among Prior Purchasers of Handguns: Incidence and Risk Factors,” Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Vol. 69, No. 4, 2010, pp. 948–955.
Wright, M. A., G. J. Wintemute, and B. E. Claire, “People and Guns Involved in Denied and Completed Handgun Sales,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 11, No. 4, 2005, pp. 247–250.
Wright, M. A., G. J. Wintemute, and B. E. Claire, “Gun Suicide by Young People in California: Descriptive Epidemiology and Gun Ownership,” Journal of Adolescent Health, Vol. 43, No. 6, 2008, pp. 619–622.
Wright, Mona A., Garen J. Wintemute, and Frederick P. Rivara, “Effectiveness of Denial of Handgun Purchase to Persons Believed to Be at High Risk for Firearm Violence,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 89, No. 1, 1999, pp. 88–90.
Wu, Eric Q., Lizheng Shi, Howard Birnbaum, Teresa Hudson, and Ronald Kessler, “Annual Prevalence of Diagnosed Schizophrenia in the USA: A Claims Data Analysis Approach,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 36, No. 11, 2006, pp. 1535–1540.
Xue, Xiaonan, Mimi Y. Kim, Tao Wang, Mark H. Kuniholm, and Howard D. Strickler, “A Statistical Method for Studying Correlated Rare Events and Their Risk Factors,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2017, pp. 1416–1428.
Yablon, Alex, “Use of Red Flag Laws Varies Widely Among Local Police,” The Trace, April 23, 2019.
Zawitz, Marianne W., Guns Used in Crime, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ-148201, 1995.
Zeoli, April M., Shannon Frattaroli, Kelly Roskam, and Anastasia K. Herrera, “Removing Firearms from Those Prohibited from Possession by Domestic Violence Restraining Orders: A Survey and Analysis of State Laws,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2019, pp. 114–125.
Zeoli, April M., Alexander McCourt, Shani Buggs, Shannon Frattaroli, David Lilley, and Daniel W. Webster, “Analysis of the Strength of Legal Firearms Restrictions for Perpetrators of Domestic Violence and Their Associations with Intimate Partner Homicide,” American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 187, No. 11, 2018, pp. 2365–2371.
Zeoli, April M., and Jennifer K. Paruk, “Potential to Prevent Mass Shootings Through Domestic Violence Firearm Restrictions,” Criminology and Public Policy, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2020, pp. 129–145.
Zeoli, A. M., and D. W. Webster, “Effects of Domestic Violence Policies, Alcohol Taxes and Police Staffing Levels on Intimate Partner Homicide in Large U.S. Cities,” Injury Prevention, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2010, pp. 90–95.
Zimmerman, Paul R., “The Deterrence of Crime Through Private Security Efforts: Theory and Evidence,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 37, 2014, pp. 66–75.
Zimring, Franklin E., “Firearms and Federal Law: The Gun Control Act of 1968,” Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 4, No. 1, 1975, pp. 133–198.
View the full project bibliography
Suggested Citation
Samuel Peterson and Shawn Bushway, "Law Enforcement Approaches for Reducing Gun Violence," RAND Corporation, April 22, 2020. https://www.rand.org/research/gun-policy/analysis/essays/law-enforcement-approaches-for-reducing-gun-violence.html

Featured Researcher



Samuel Peterson
Policy Researcher


Samuel (Sam) Peterson is a policy researcher in the Behavioral and Policy Sciences Department at the RAND Corporation. He has broad interests in topics within and outside of criminal justice, with prior research experience in gun violence prevention, sexual assault at American colleges and…


Explore Related Content



Gun Policy Expert-Opinion Tool


Gun Policy Research Review


Research Review Methodology


