Our colleague and friend  passed away on April 19, 2020 following a hard-fought battle with cancer.  Marty had been a vital member of the Belfer Center community for thirteen years, highly respected for his contributions to nuclear security as Executive Director of the Project on Managing the Atom (MTA) and beloved for his mentoring and support of fellows and students and for his sincere interest in all of his colleagues. Several days before Marty’s passing, many of his friends and colleagues at the Center and beyond sent him words of support and shared with him how much he meant to them. Many more since then have remembered him with heartfelt stories of his impact on their lives. See below for some of these shared memories of Marty - whom we all miss tremendously. The family has suggested that in lieu of flowers, donations in Marty's memory may be made to either the or . Notification of donations may be sent to “Marty loved what he did and made profound and lasting contributions to the founding and enduring mission of the Belfer Center:  protecting humanity from the unending and existential threat of nuclear weapons. Original research, actionable inputs to policymakers, and training the generations that must follow us — all this will long be valued as our poor world makes its way forward safely. Marty's passing is a huge loss for the Center. We send our sincere condolences to his family.”“Marty was a warm and steady leader of Managing the Atom.  Over his 13 years at the Center, he led the way to more than doubling the size of the group.  I relied on him for wise counsel, for playing a key role in our studies, workshops, and other research and policy outreach initiatives, and for helping to build our community into what it is today.   Some of his writings remain key readings in the course on nuclear weapons that Will Tobey and I teach. He cared deeply about the fellows and staff in our group and was always a helpful and friendly mentor.  He was a good friend, and his loss is a tremendous blow.”“I will try, probably unsuccessfully, to contain my emotions so that I am able to make some inadequate remarks about Marty. I want to start by saying to Hilary, Jacob, and Nathan that I am so profoundly sorry for your loss.  Marty was much more yours than ours, but in our world we too feel a great sense of loss that this fine person has been taken from us. I met Marty more than 20 years ago when he joined the American Academy of Arts and Sciences to serve as the program officer for the Committee on International Security Studies.  Then as now, I was heavily involved in the work of the committee, which brought me into regular and close contact with him.   It was immediately apparent that Marty was one of those quiet, behind the scenes people who got things done and made things happen.  At the time, I was responsible, along with Russian colleague Dmitri Trenin, for a project on Russian military power, in which Marty was the indispensable partner.  Without him, that book would never have been finished.  There were many projects at the American Academy like that – relying on Marty for progress and completion. We were soon fast friends and remained so ever after.  And I formed early on judgments about Marty that I never had reason to change: When Marty joined Managing the Atom 13 years ago, he brought these attributes with him.  With Matt, the three of us became a team, and working together was never anything but a pleasure.  Marty was in so many ways a perfect colleague, a real partner.  I say with honest conviction that it has been a blessing to work so long with such a person. But the real beneficiaries of Marty’s presence in MTA were our fellows.  He was devoted to them.  As Matt has well described, Marty’s door was always open, his desire to be helpful was endless, and his gratification and enjoyment of other’s successes was deep and genuine, his instinct to promote himself was nonexistent.  For generation after generation of MTA fellows, Marty was the heart and soul of the program.  That is a legacy he and his family can be proud of.  This is performance that cannot easily be equaled. Marty was not only supportive of and generous toward the fellows.  For our past and current fellows, many of whom are here today, Marty is an exemplary role model.  The Malin rules are powerful, effective, and a large part of what made Marty such an appealing person.  Treat people well.  Take care of others.  Offer to help.  Rejoice in the success of your friends and colleagues.  Build, nurture, respect and value your community.  These are the values that will make you a treasured friend and colleague. I have so many fond memories of Marty.  Some of them involve our travels together.  We shared an enthusiasm for Italy and journeyed several times together to a meeting in the Italian Alps, in the beautiful little village of Andalo.  Marty and I love that place.  And I have the most distinct memory of Marty, in the dining room of the charming family run hotel there, beaming over a plate of delicious risotto, accompanied – in that Italian way – by a bottomless glass of red wine, surrounded by friends and colleagues and students.  That is Marty, just as he should be remembered.  That is a special memory for me, and one I will carry with me.  Marty was a special person: A wonderful friend, a great colleague, an outstanding human being.  He was loved and admired in our community.  No one loved and admired him more than me.  I will miss him terribly.”“During the past thirteen years, Marty has been a great colleague and intellectual collaborator. He helped build and run a great program, and always watched out for the staff, fellows, and students connected to MTA. And he did all this in a humble and friendly way that truly distinguished him.”“Marty gave me a warm and kind welcome when I started at the Belfer Center, and he was one of the first people I sought out to help me understand and navigate the place. It’s easy to see why so many colleagues and fellows came to see him as a mentor and friend over these years. His intellectual contributions and deep relationships with the Belfer Center team will leave a lasting impression.”“To the Harvard Kennedy School Community,
We are very sad to report that Martin Malin, a long-time member of our community, passed away this week (from an illness not related to Covid-19).
Martin had served since 2007 as the executive director of the Managing the Atom project at the Belfer Center, working closely with Matt Bunn. During his time as executive director, the size of the group engaged in this project more than doubled. In addition, Martin co-authored a number of studies on security for nuclear weapons and nuclear materials around the world. Those studies are important readings for students and policymakers who seek to make the world safer. Before coming to the Kennedy School, Martin worked at the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, where he was the director for the Committee on International Security Studies.
In Matt’s words, ‘Marty was a warm and steady leader of Managing the Atom. I relied on him for wise counsel and for helping to build our community into what it is today. He cared deeply about the fellows and staff in our group and was always a helpful and friendly mentor.’
Our thoughts and prayers are with Martin’s wife, their two sons, and the rest of his family and friends at this very sad time.”“Marty had a profound and positive impact on those around him. He was a great musical guru, opening my eyes to the brilliance of the Beach Boys, Bruce Springsteen, the Beatles, the Allman Brothers, and so many others. I smile when I think of our analytical conversations about food: the layered complexities of Toscanini’s burnt caramel ice cream, the richness of Clover’s Brussel sprout sandwich, and the advantages of Indian buffets. Marty was always there for those in need. To our fellows,  he was an endless well of wisdom, kindness, and comfort. He made Managing the Atom feel like home for many wayward researchers, including myself. There are dozens of academics impacting the world right now that owe him a debt of gratitude for giving them a chance. More than anything, though, what I will remember about Marty is how much of himself he invested in his work. He cared deeply about making sure everything he did was the best it could be and could be depended upon for ensuring I was doing my best. I learned many lessons from him that I will carry for the rest of my life.”“Marty was a kind, thoughtful, and devoted leader of MTA for many years, and a dear friend and mentor to innumerable colleagues. He was the heart of the MTA community, always motivated by a belief that his mission was not simply a professional one; he strove to maintain, in his words, “a family” of staff and fellows that would look out for each other and enrich each other’s lives. He led by example, seizing on every opportunity to better know his colleagues and to actively improve their days. Time after time, he provided indispensable advice while never failing to sense the right moment to inject much-needed levity into serious discussions. He was a masterful resource on a wide variety of topics—whether you were seeking a greater understanding of Middle East politics or a detailed examination of the ice cream shops in Cambridge and Somerville, you turned to Marty. I will miss his laugh booming down the hallway; I will miss the knowledge and wit he brought to every conversation; I will miss his sage guidance. His loss will be mourned by the countless friends whose lives he shaped.”“Marty was a mentor, colleague, and a true friend. Over the last several years, his thoughtful guidance and caring has left an indelible mark on my career. I will always remember our after work war-room sessions at Charlie’s Kitchen spent solving the worlds most pressing problems. No matter how cynical I could be, Marty always believed in the potential good of humankind and the cooperative spirit. He brought people together and fostered a sense of community and family at Managing the Atom. I will forever be grateful for having had the opportunity to call Marty a friend and colleague.”“Marty Malin. Your absence is palpable. The understated, genuine way in which you have always expressed interest in our work, joy for our successes, and understanding for our struggles made you powerful presence in the life of our project. It made us, fellows, into a team, bound together by one mission, contributing in our small way to making our shared world a better place. In your work, in your interactions with those around, in the courageous battle with cancer, you have been and will remain an inspiration.Honored to have known you.” “Marty Malin was a real Mensch – a colleague deeply dedicated to the advancement of those around him, invested in intellectual partnership, driven by the mission of building a real community dedicated to preventing the cataclysmic use of nuclear force through a better understanding of the stewardship of nuclear science. He was as an original thinker: Looking to highlight the connection between disciplines at the Belfer Center and wanting colleagues to thrive through collaboration. He was a mentor to all of us, and – perhaps, odd in an academic environment – seemed unburdened by the ego that drives many to excel. Marty was a straight shooter: He built community through his calm demeanor, wry sense of humor and deep humanity. Even in illness, he was thoughtful and supportive to me personally, which I will never forget. We have lost a wonderful colleague, and I personally have lost a friend.”“In the 12 years I knew Marty, he was an incredible mentor, colleague, and friend. When I was an intern, and later as a fellow, he always treated me (and all of us regardless of gender, ethnic or political views) as a peer - with great respect for our research and analysis. He encouraged me to speak up, to write, and to believe in myself. He believed wholeheartedly in all of us fellows and our work, sometimes even more than we believed in ourselves. He was there to hold our hands through hard times and guide us to the light at the end of the tunnel. He celebrated our achievements with us and worked hard to make sure that we, as a group of fellows, had a sense of community and support for the initiatives that would strengthen our academic and social lives and provide us with opportunities to grow. As a mentor and friend, he generously offered his time to review my work and give me detailed and honest feedback, even during his personal time on weekends.  I am forever indebted to Marty for his guidance and unconditional support - for giving me hope and confidence that what I do matters, and that if we work together we can contribute to make the world a better place.”“Our community is diminished without Marty. He was a consummate mentor who accelerated the careers of every young fellow who walked through the Belfer doors. Marty was all about the fellows first, encouraging collaboration and community. The fifth floor was a livelier font of ideas because of him. And he was never satisfied by just good research, he wanted those ideas communicated to decision-makers. Marty's guidance will be missed well beyond Cambridge.”“In appreciation for the community Marty sought to build, and the manner by which he built it.  His care shows.”“I want to express my condolences to the whole Belfer Center family on Marty’s passing. Among so many incredible people at HKS/Belfer, Marty was one of the kindest, more generous, and most enjoyable that I was lucky enough to work alongside. I know what a serious scholar Marty was, but in reflecting on my time working with him, I keep coming back to the kind person that was underneath that incredible brain. I am so thankful for the opportunity that I had to work with him on Nuclear Security Matters and the trust that he placed in a just-out-of-undergrad kid to put together a website that Belfer stood behind. Marty was also incredibly helpful in vouching for me when I was applying for my job with HKSEE, which I will forever be indebted to him for. Nothing can ever replace a person or their presence, but I’m so glad that I got to know Marty and create memories with him.”“It is with deep sadness that CNS notes the recent passing of Dr. Martin (Marty) Malin, who served for many years as the Executive Director of the Project on Managing the Atom at Harvard University’s Belfer Center. Marty was a distinguished scholar on arms control and nonproliferation issues, especially those pertaining to the Middle East. He was a superb editor and one to whom I was personally indebted in a collaboration that led to the publication of For many in the community, particularly those who had the privilege of working at some point with the Belfer Center—including CNS’s Ian J. Stewart, Chen Zak Kane, and others—he was a supportive and caring mentor. Many of today’s nonproliferation scholars and practitioners around the world owe him a debt of gratitude for his leadership, insight, and approach to the challenging issues of our work.A genuinely lovely person, Marty will be sorely missed by his friends and the broader international security community.”“The news of Marty’s sudden death has been devastating and shocking for so many of us who have had the good fortune to work with him. His passing away is no less than a personal loss and tragedy for me. No words can do justice for Marty’s integrity, scholarship, guidance, and sincere friendship towards the scholars and MTA/ISP Fellows. He was indeed a great man. I have not known a more decent, gentle, caring, and humble person. He mentored, supported, and encouraged so many young scholars from all over the world, without exception. He would go out of his way to help and motivate the Fellows whenever they needed him. His enthusiastic and warm introductions in the weekly MTA seminars with the words “Good Morning everyone” expressed his warmth and enthusiasm for the work of the Fellows and guest speakers. He would strive to arrange “Coffee and Catastrophe” sessions in MTA whenever possible. He took personal interest in the research and careers of the Fellows and looked after their personal and professional well-being with the utmost sincerity and compassion. His radiant warmth, and gentle and polite demeanor helped make MTA home, far away from home. He was thus ideally suited to manage the Fellows program. While each year, several young scholars from so many diverse backgrounds, cultures, and places arrived and left, the conducive environment that MTA/ISP offered made the Fellowship a once in a lifetime experience. I was particularly lucky and privileged to have worked with Marty for three years—first as a Stanton Nuclear Security Junior Faculty Fellow (2015-2016) and then as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow (2016-2018), jointly with the ISP/MTA. He offered solace and sincere advice to me whenever I was in distress and offered tremendous encouragement at every step of my research. Without his support and inspiration, I could never have published my MTA Discussion Paper in 2017. The Belfer-Pakistan Track 1.5 dialogue would not have been possible without his cooperation and personal interest. I vividly recall so many instances when his face lit up with genuine joy, on my marriage in 2017, and on the birth of my son the following year. I have so many memories of him, of his motivation, professional advice, his laughter, and his humor. Together with Matt Bunn, Marty was able to build such a splendid institution in MTA. It will not be the same without him.Marty passed away too soon. We were so lucky to have been part of the MTA family under his guidance. His untimely departure from this world reminds us of the unpredictability of life itself, and that we as the MTA family should endeavor to stay connected. Now that he is no more, we can honor his memory by living up to his expectations and taking his legacy forward. R.I.P Marty. You will be dearly missed but will always remain in our hearts.”“In memory of our dear Marty Malin,
It is with a heavy heart and deep sorrow that I am writing about Marty, who left us last week.  The ten months (Sept 2018-June 2019) that I spent at the HKS Belfer Center as an MTA research fellow with nice gentelmen colleagues and scholars like Marty, Matt Bunn, Steve Miller, John Holdren, Steve Walt, Tarek Masoud et. al., has been one the most enriching periods of my professional life.  A highlight of those good old days was almost daily walking to Marty’s office down the hall during afternoon breaks, sharing a KIND snack bar with him over a cup of coffee and great conversation.  Hearing his humble and unpretentious, nevertheless, world-class scholararly perceptive analyses of current events was certainly a beatiful treat and most refreshing.As a verse in a Persian poem goes: “A good name and his good deeds live on forever.”  Marty’s good name and his good deeds; his warmth, KINDness, sharp mind (and editing pen!), as well as his memories live on forever; they are always in my heart and mind, alive and well.”“I have worked with Marty for years--and I have been missing working with him for quite some time.  He always has had the best interests of the fellows at heart.  I am missing his great sense of humor as well.”“To my best colleague and friend Marty:I am very sad for your loss, and I am deeply grateful for your great help over the last 18 years. I enjoyed our long and good collaboration very much. I will always remember you for your caring and loving nature. I miss you very much, and you will have my love forever. My deepest condolences to you and your family. May you rest in peace.”“I am very sorry to hear of the passing of Marty Malin. He is one of the greatest mentors in my life, and was always willing to go the extra mile for a colleague in a time of need. His perspective, humor, and dedication to encouraging junior scholars will live on in the Managing the Atom Project and the Belfer Center, and also in the many scholars and experts he has supported over the years.”“May you rest in peace, Marty. We have all learned a lot from you both at work and off work,  and we always remain grateful for your willingness to share your experience and knowledge and all the help you have given us.I will always and fondly remember you as a wonderful person, very thoughtful scholar, and the best musician our band has played with.”“Marty had a huge positive impact on the lives of so many researchers in the nuclear community. A great number of people hold him in very high regard as a scholar, mentor and friend. Marty was a huge part of my experience at the Belfer Center and my time in the United States. He provided friendly support as I moved to Cambridge, as he did for so many fellows over the years, and I’m grateful he continued to welcome my participation. I will remember enjoyable time spent socialising together outside of the office— from our first meeting at Charlie’s Kitchen when I visited Cambridge to find housing, a night out at a bluegrass concert at the Sinclair, to a group trip that MTA took up to Maine to mark the end of the year. Marty always provided a friendly ear and great thoughtful advice – he was always as keen to celebrate personal successes at happy hour as to chat about research at MTA’s “Coffee and Catastrophe”. I always enjoyed catching up with Marty on my visits to Cambridge – discussing our respective research, sharing personal news, and talking about new craft breweries. I will greatly miss these discussions. I feel very lucky to have been able to call Marty a colleague and a friend. My condolences to his family and friends.”“I got to know Marty during a year at Belfer Center 2007-8--not as well as many who have written but well enough to say: it is not easy to be both brilliant and self-effacing at a place like Harvard, but Marty managed it. We did not, alas, stay in touch regularly enough, but I shall miss him.  To use an old-fashioned term, but totally appropriate: he was a gentleman.”“I was sad to hear Marty Malin recently passed away. I remember Marty as a fundamentally decent human being who was unfailingly generous, caring, and supportive to me and, as best I could tell, to literally everyone else, too. He made Harvard--which has its charms but can also be an intense and sometimes stressful place--feel like home. I'll always be grateful for that and will carry Marty's example with me. I'm reminded of the Maya Angelou quote, 'I've learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never forget how you made them feel.'”“i joined columbia's middle east institute in 1996 as administrator.  he was already a presence there.  for both marty and myself, the mei was a way station to other professional endeavors.consequently, we often chatted about jobs, cv edits, publications, etc.  in fact, he pointed me to a journal that published my first article.in no time, we became 'office friends' catching every occasion we had to chat about everything under the sun.i remember well when he brought to the office his toddler, the curly red-headed little boy.  they came to my office which faced the hudson and marty was having a discussion with his son about the setting sun!marty was excited to have received an offer in cambridge and off he went.  i was happy for him, of course, but lost my 'office friend'.  my own tenure at the mei came in june 2001 due to loss of funding.i am saddened by the news of his death.”“Talking with Marty always brightened my day. Whether it was chatting in the hall, brainstorming on the phone about an oped I was pitching for one of the MTA fellows, or running into him in Arlington or on the ‘T,’ Marty always had something of interest and value to say and was a great listener. He cared about other people and that showed in everything he did - from helping and supporting and encouraging fellows with their research and writing to providing moral support to staff going through tough times. Along with the many contributions he made to the Center and to the broader world through his dedication to improving nuclear security, he also added a special warmth and friendliness to the Center - and to the people here. I will miss him a lot.”“Dear Marty,It has been an honor and a delight to have you as a colleague for all these years. In addition to all of your professional accomplishments, you have blessed us all with Nathan and Jacob, who are sure to make their own amazing professional and personal contributions to the world. You have much to be proud of, and I hope you find great pleasure in knowing this. I am holding you and your family warmly in my thoughts and sending you all my best wishes.All my best, Karen”“My dear friend, colleague and fellow Broadway aficionado (I'll never forget the time we met there by sheer chance), Christopher and I send you our fondest wishes and support from 10,000 miles away. Literally generations of MTAers, including me, have been beneficiaries of your support, wisdom and zest for life, and I'm sure they are all thinking of you at this time.”“Marty,Before I officially joined the Belfer center I was asked by the HKS CFO to help the Belfer Center with their year-end close as they didn’t have a finance director in place.About half an hour after the email went out to Belfer program people letting them know of this arrangement, I got a call from you requesting an urgent meeting.  We met the next day down in the Hauser conference room and you were so excited to get to work on your outstanding issues that we continued to meet every other day for a week or two during the transition.  You were my introduction to the Belfer Center and we struck up a great working relationship that continued since that time. Our regular meetings to discuss the state of Managing the Atom would invariably run over schedule as we spent time talking about everything and anything and your dry wit was a welcome respite during the budget season.  Every interaction I have had with you has been positive as we worked on the MTA budget but spent half the time chatting about music, bands, politics,  and more. I have really missed chatting with you this academic year.”Guy“Marty, in my experiences you were truly unique at the Kennedy School. You were the most kind and helpful to the most junior scholars, and more excited with other's research insights and publications than your own. To me, you were the model for being an international security scholar, colleague, and person. I was super lucky to have worked with you, and I know my opinion is shared by everyone else who worked with you. Thank you.”Micah“Marty,Thank you for always being an extremely thoughtful and kind colleague. You have meant so much to so many of us at the Center on staff. Shana, Amanda and I are forever grateful for your thoughtfulness and support over the years. Working at Belfer as a woman has it’s trying moments, and as a colleague you have always stood out for your thoughtful and caring nature and your ability to mentor staff. I am so grateful to have worked with you at Belfer over the years, and appreciate your level of professionalism and thoughtfulness. You always had an intriguing question and have always seen the irony of things at Belfer. You have had a significant impact on Belfer and the staff, fellows and faculty; we all are better people for having the opportunity to work with you and to have had you be a part of our lives.  We are all indebted to you and I can’t thank you enough for being what makes Belfer, Belfer.”Best, Sarah“Marty,Thank you for being an incredibly kind, compassionate, and sincere mentor and friend over the years. You are deeply cherished by all of us and we’re with you.Sending you and your family all of my love, warmth, and friendship.”Yours always, Morgan “Marty,I just wanted you to know that your friendship always made the good times feel better and the tough times seem like they too would pass.  I'm so grateful to have learned by your example on how to be a good leader, a good person, a good husband, and a good father. Thinking of you, Hilary, and the boys.  Sending much love from my family to yours.”With deep gratitude, Your friend John Park 