
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Breast screening: identifying and reducing inequalities
  

  
  

  
    
  Guidance and shared practice for breast screening providers, commissioners and other stakeholders on addressing inequalities.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Public Health England

      
      Published
      23 September 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      
  
    
      Applies to England


      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Breast screening: identifying inequalities
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Breast screening: reducing inequalities
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Breast screening easy read appointment letter template
    
        ODT, 547KB
    

      
        This file is in an OpenDocument format
      

      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email publications@phe.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance is to support breast screening providers, commissioners and other partners in identifying and reducing inequalities throughout the breast screening pathway.

It includes information and resources on how to:


  identify inequalities
  reduce inequalities


This guidance includes recommendations from a research project, funded by the Department of Health and Social Care through the Health and Wellbeing Alliance, to identify why some people from groups experiencing marginalisation and exclusion do not attend breast screening, and how to improve the experiences of those who are.

Many thanks to the following groups, who worked with Public Health England (PHE) on that project:


  Faith Action
  Friends
  Families and Travellers
  Latin American Women’s Rights Service
  Macmillan
  Association of Mental Health Providers on behalf of the Mental Health Consortia
  Race Equality Foundation
  The Lived Experience Alliance
  The National LGB&T Partnership


Examples of initiatives to tackle breast screening inequalities have been shared via the PHE Screening Blog. Please contact the PHE Screening helpdesk if you have an example of practice we could share with other providers.




        
      

      
    Published 23 September 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Abdominal aortic aneurysm screening: programme overview
        Bowel cancer screening: professional guidance
        Breast screening programme: standards
        Newborn and infant physical examination: clinical guidance
        Breast screening pathway requirements specification

  




      

    Collection

  


        Breast screening: professional guidance

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    