
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Contact a DASA Innovation Partner
  

  
  
  
      
  How to contact one of DASA's regionally based Innovation Partners, and the DASA Help Centre 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      29 July 2019
      Last updated
      
        6 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Submit an innovation outline

        
        
          To Register for an account

        
        
          DUNS number

        
        
          To log in once registered

        
        
          Next steps

        
        
          Submit an enquiry

        
        
          Contact the DASA Help Centre

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

The DASA Office and the DASA Help Centre will be closed from Monday 20th December 2021 until Tuesday 4th January 2022. You can email us at accelerator@dstl.gov.uk, and we will endeavour to get back to you from the 4th January onwards.


The Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) has a team of regionally based Innovation Partners, who are available to give advice to suppliers about their ideas and how they can best engage with DASA. All of our Innovation Partners are Civil Servants who work for the government and they will protect your Intellectual Property. Your correspondence and any discussions will be in strict confidence.

To submit a full innovation outline, please follow the steps below:

Submit an innovation outline

If you would like to submit an innovation outline, please complete an ‘Innovation Outline - Referral to an Innovation Partner’ form, you will need an account in our submission service to do this.

To Register for an account

Please register for a new submission service account here.

DUNS number

You will be asked to supply a DUNS number - a unique nine-digit identifier for businesses.

Organisations based in the United Kingdom can obtain their DUNS number from Dun & Bradstreet.

Organisations based outside the United Kingdom can access their DUNS number using this link.

If you do not have a DUNS number

Individuals who are not representing a registered entity, and therefore unable to obtain a DUNS number, can engage with their local DASA Innovation Partner by submitting this enquiry form.

To log in once registered

If you already have a new submission service account log in here.

Next steps

Once in your submission service account click ‘Start Now’.


  Service category: choose ‘DASA Innovation Outline’.
  Service name: choose ‘Innovation Outline - referral to an Innovation Partner’.
  Tick to say you accept the terms and conditions.
  Save and continue.
  Give your proposal a relevant title relating to your idea, or if it is for an Innovation Focus area, add the unique number.
  Add a brief summary of what you would like to talk about with an Innovation Partner.
  Tick at least one technology area. If you are unsure which to tick, give it your best guess. You will not be held to this area.
  Save and continue.
  In Section A: Innovation details, you must add something. You could give more detail about your idea, so that the Innovation Partner will be better informed when they contact you, or you can just state that you wish to speak to an Innovation Partner, it is your choice.


Once we have your contact details, and a brief outline of what you would like to discuss, the Innovation Partner from your region will aim to contact you within 10 working days. If you experience any issues or wish to discuss a specific competition or speak to someone else in DASA, please email us at accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.

Submit an enquiry

If you would like to submit an enquiry, please complete this form. Please note, this is for individuals, and you cannot complete a full ‘Innovation Outline’ through this form. This form will enable you to submit an enquiry to an Innovation Partner who will respond to you within 10 days. This might help you gain clarity in whether or not to submit a full innovation outline to DASA.

Contact the DASA Help Centre

If you require submission service support or want to discuss a specific competition, please contact us in one of the following ways:


  Email: accelerator@dstl.gov.uk -  DASA Help Centre
  Phone: 01980 950000 option 3 - Urgent DASA enquiries (open 09:00am – 12:00pm Monday-Friday)


Please note: The DASA Office and the DASA Help Centre will be closed from Monday 20th December 2021 until Tuesday 4th January 2022.





      
        
    Published 29 July 2019
    Last updated 6 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 December 2021
              Added holidays closure notice: The DASA Office and the DASA Help Centre will be closed from Monday 20th December 2021 until Tuesday 4th January 2022.
            
            
              29 July 2019
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Submit a proposal
        Apply For Funding
        Assessment process and criteria

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces

  


  

  


    
  


    