Arctic residents, students, policymakers, academics, and business leaders convened in Reykjavík, Iceland, for the 2021 Arctic Circle Assembly from Thursday, October 14 to Saturday, October 17. The Arctic Circle Assembly serves as the largest international gathering in the Arctic. This year, the Assembly drew more than 1,300 attendees following guidance issued by local public health authorities.  The Belfer Center’s Arctic Initiative delegation included Co-Founder and Senior Fellow , who serves also as the Director-General of Iceland’s National Energy Authority, Arctic Initiative Faculty Associate , Interim Research Manager , and IGA 671M Course Assistant , a student at Harvard Kennedy School.  The Arctic Initiative organized two sessions at this year’s Assembly: 1) , and 2)  with The Wilson Center’s Polar Institute. The Policy and Action on Plastic in the Arctic Ocean report is available .  The Arctic Innovation Lab—co-led by the Arctic Initiative since 2017—featured 10 student innovators from a range of countries. The Arctic Innovation Lab aims to facilitate an ongoing dialogue between generations to speed up knowledge transition and build capacity for the future of the Arctic. This year, the ten students, including three from the Harvard Kennedy School, proposed wide-ranging innovations to address challenges facing the Arctic. Two innovators from last year’s virtual Innovation Lab developed their pitches into publications.  released , and  wrote  with Halla Hrund Logadóttir.The session showcased the  that the Arctic Initiative advanced in collaboration with The Wilson Center and the Icelandic Chairship of the Arctic Council. Logadóttir moderated the session, and she was joined by , Arctic Council designated Special Coordinator on Plastics and Marine Litter, Government of Iceland, , Arctic Analyst, Polar Institute, Wilson Center, USA, and , Environmental Specialist, AECO - Association of Arctic Expedition Cruise Operators, Norway In addition to these two sessions, Logadóttir served as the chair for , moderator of , and speaker at. Jennifer Spence served as a speaker at and , and as a panelist at . 