
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Opportunities and funding
  

  
  

  
    
  Below you will find funding schemes which may be relevant to companies looking to develop innovation that supports the operation of the UK Border including the end to end process of importing and exporting goods. This page will also be updated with the latest opportunities for industries with an interest in Border innovation.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Cabinet Office

      
      Published
      31 August 2021
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Opportunities and funding
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Border Innovation Hub has been set up to support industry to innovate with a specific focus on technology and innovations that support processes at the border or within the import or export journey. It should be noted that while the focus of the hub is not to simply procure new technologies, where it is necessary for government to procure technology from industry or go to tender for specific services we will list these opportunities as they arise.

Listed below are also funding competitions and accelerators that may be of interest to you if you require funds to help develop new technologies.

Defence and Security Accelerator opportunities:

Apply for funding

The Defence and Security Accelerator finds and funds exploitable innovation to support UK defence and security quickly and effectively. If your innovation will improve defence and security at the border then you can apply for funding through DASA. The webpage above sets out open and upcoming competitions, which are either themed competitions or open calls for innovation. DASA’s Security Rapid Impaction Innovations lane specifically caters for innovation proposals addressing the full spectrum of security challenges facing the UK.

Connected Places Catapult

Who we are

For start-up companies whose solutions will aid the secure movement of goods, you may find relevant opportunities through Connected Places Catapult. Catapults aim to connect businesses and public sector leaders to cutting-edge research to spark innovation and grow new markets.

Transport Research and Innovation Grants (TRIG)

In collaboration with Connected Places Catapult, the Department for Transport (DfT)  provides  grant funding for SME’s and universities looking to innovate within specific industry challenges areas. For example, the 2020 Security-TRIG Programme supported organisations to carry out research and feasibility studies within several challenge sectors, including border detection and security. For more information, please visit

Innovate UK

Apply for Innovation Funding

Innovate UK is the UK’s innovation agency and they host many funding competitions on their website. Using the above link you can search for those most relevant to you.

Further guidance on selling services and goods to the public sector

For further guidance on providing goods and services to the public sector and where to locate opportunities to sell goods or services, please visit: https://www.gov.uk/tendering-for-public-sector-contracts




        
      

      
    Published 31 August 2021



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Accelerator competition: improving crowd resilience
        Catch the ChemBio SCENT!
        Competition: Biosensing across wide areas
        Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) Open Call for Innovation
        Defence and Security Accelerator funded contracts

  




      

    Collection

  


        Border Innovation Hub

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Trade and investment
        Brexit: business guidance

  


  

  


    
  


    