
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Education for a Connected World
  

  
  

  
    
  A framework to equip children and young people for digital life

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Council for Internet Safety

      
      Published
      23 February 2018
      Last updated
      
        30 June 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Education for a Connected World framework - 2020 edition
    
        PDF, 2.77MB, 65 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@dcms.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The Education for a Connected World framework describes the Digital knowledge and skills that children and young people should have the opportunity to develop at different ages and stages of their lives. It highlights what a child should know in terms of current online technology, its influence on behaviour and development, and what skills they need to be able to navigate it.

The document supports one of the key aims of the government’s Internet Safety Strategy of supporting children to stay safe and make a positive contribution online, as well enabling teachers to develop effective strategies for understanding and handling online risks.



        
      

      
    Published 23 February 2018
    Last updated 30 June 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              30 June 2020
              Added Education for a Connected World framework - 2020 edition.
            
            
              23 February 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Digital Resilience Framework
        Teaching online safety in schools
        Sharing nudes and semi-nudes: advice for education settings working with children and young people
        Searching, screening and confiscation at school
        Preventing bullying

  


  










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Safeguarding children

  


  

  


    
  


    