
      


  
    


  
  
    CLOSED Greater Cambridgeshire, Greater Peterborough Region of Learning - OC13S20P1783  
  

  
  
  
    
  Call to run a project which is a place-based, digital innovation that will support and appeal to all young people, but specifically target those from disadvantaged backgrounds aged 15 to 24 by supporting progression through education and work.   

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, Department for Work and Pensions, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, and Rural Payments Agency

      
      Published
      19 October 2020
      Last updated
      
        5 January 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Fund state: 
      Closed
      Type: 
      Access to employment
      Location: 
      East of England
      Funding source: 
      European Social Fund
      Closing date: 
      28 December 2020
    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Location

        
        
          Value

        
        
          Deadlines

        
        
          Completion date

        
        
          Full Application Submission

        
        
          Technical Support

        
        
          Contact details

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

This call is now closed. Please do not submit an application for this call. The information provided on this page is for reference purposes only.


Cambridgeshire and Peterborough is a diverse area, with significant variations in the life chances, educational attainment, aspirations and employment opportunities for young people. In particular, this is especially true for children who have been in receipt of free school meals, where levels of educational attainment are low compared to the national picture.

Proposals submitted under this call should make an important contribution to COVID-19 recovery in addressing the issues above and help us avoid a ‘pandemic generation’ of young people with poorer education and skills prospects.  The call identifies the need for a place-based, digital innovation project that will support and appeal to all children and young people, but specifically target those from disadvantaged backgrounds aged 15 to 24 by supporting progression through learning, education and work.  It is envisaged that young people will have access to a ‘universal passport to learning’ that uses interconnected and smart technologies to promote and sustain lifelong learning, drive inclusive employment, and improve the general life chances of disadvantaged young people.

For more information, download the 
Call Specification. 

Location

The project must cover the Greater Cambridge, Greater Peterborough LEP area.

Value

Approximately £625,000 of ESF is available.

Deadlines
Full application deadline: 28 December 2020

Completion date
Projects must be financially completed (i.e. have a proposed Financial Completion Date) no later than 31st December 2023; however, the Managing Authority reserves the right to vary the maximum duration in exceptional circumstances.

Full Application Submission
To apply for funding under this call you will need to complete and submit your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT System.

Please note: the ECLAIMS IT System can only be access from within the UK.


Full Applications submitted in the ECLAIMS IT System after the call closing date shown above and on the call specification will not be appraised.

If you do not already have access to the ECLAIMS IT system, please request an ‘ECLAIMS External Access Form’ by emailing E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

You will need to request an External Access Form for each person in your organisation who requires access.

It is your responsibility to ensure you request and activate your ECLAIMS access in sufficient time. We strongly advise that you obtain and activate your ECLAIMS access at least 2 weeks prior to the advertised call closure date, if not sooner.


You are also advised to read the details in the call specification in order to produce an application that complies with the requirements and meets the needs set out in the ESF Operational Programme. All this information, the related guidance and the European Social Fund Operational Programme can be found from  (https://www.gov.uk/england-2014-to-2020-european-structural-and-investment-funds).
The published ESF Online Full Application Guidance also provides step-by-step advice on how to complete your Full Application using the ECLAIMS IT system. [ESF Online Full Application Guidance] (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/european-social-fund-online-full-applications).

Technical Support

If you encounter any technical difficulties completing or submitting your Full Application via the ECLAIMS IT system, please send an email to
E.CLAIMSSUPPORT@dwp.gov.uk

The technical support operating hours are Monday to Friday, from 8am to 6pm and it is your responsibility to ensure you seek and technical advice in sufficient time to complete and submit your Full Application before the published call closure date.

The Managing Authority reserves the right to reject applications which are incomplete or not submitted in a timely and compliant way.

Contact details
If you have any questions about the Call Specification or ESF Online Full Application Guidance, please contact esf.2014-2020@dwp.gov.uk. This address should not be used to request technical support.





      

      
        
    Published 19 October 2020
    Last updated 5 January 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              5 January 2021
              Greater Cambridgeshire, Greater Peterborough Region of Learning  OC13S20P1783  is now closed.
            
            
              19 October 2020
              First published.
            
        
      


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    










  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        European funds

  


  

  


    
  


    