
      



  
    


      
    Notice
  

  
  
    Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration competition: Stream 1 pre-commercial demonstrator (grants) (closed to applications)
  

  
  

  
    
  Stream 1 of this competition aims to accelerate commercialisation of innovative longer duration energy storage projects through to actual demonstrations.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      3 June 2021
      Last updated
      
        17 September 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Longer Duration Energy Storage competition Stream 1: guidance
    
        PDF, 854KB, 89 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 1: Grant Funding Agreement
    
        PDF, 756KB, 78 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 2: Declaration 1 - Statement of non-collusion
    
        PDF, 80.4KB, 1 page
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 2: Declaration 2 - Form of bid
    
        PDF, 110KB, 1 page
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 2: Declaration 3 - Conflict of interest
    
        PDF, 130KB, 2 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 2: Declaration 4 - The UK General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) assurance questionnaire for contractors
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 102KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 2: Declaration 5 - Consent for information sharing
    
        PDF, 143KB, 1 page
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 2: Declaration 6 - Modern slavery statement
    
        PDF, 130KB, 1 page
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 3: Technical data form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 24.8KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 4: Financial model
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 45.4KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Annex 5: Project cost breakdown form
    
        MS Excel Spreadsheet, 105KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email enquiries@beis.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            

Update 17 September 2021
This competition is now closed to applications.

Update 15 June 2021

  Annex 5: Project cost breakdown form added



This competition aims to accelerate commercialisation of innovative longer duration energy storage projects through to actual demonstrations (Stream 1) or to first-of-a-kind (FOAK) full-system prototypes (Stream 2).

We are looking for proposals for electrical storage, thermal storage and power-to-x technologies which can provide novel grid services and demonstrate cost reductions and improvement in technology performance.

They should not include commercial solutions such as pumped hydro or lithium ion.

The competition has 2 Streams. See Stream 2 for first-of-a-kind (FOAK) full-system prototypes (contracts)

Stream 1: Pre-commercial demonstrator grants - overview

Stream 1 of the competition is focused on pre-commercial demonstrator proposals.

To be in scope technologies must:


  not be commercially deployed in the UK or elsewhere
  be at technology readiness level (TRL) 6 or 7


£37.2 million of innovation funding is available for Stream 1 in the form of capital grants:


  a maximum of £7.2 million for Phase 1, with a maximum expected grant value of £1 million per project. We intend to fund around 9 projects in Phase 1
  £30 million is currently allotted to Phase 2, with the maximum expected funding per project of £11 million. We intend to fund around 3 projects in Phase 2


Applicants must secure matched private investment.

Key dates

1. Information event

We held a competition event on 17 June 2021:


  to support applicants in developing their application
  to encourage the formulation of consortia, as stream 1 requires private match funding


2. Questions about the competition

If you have questions that aren’t covered in the guidance here, please send them to storage.innovation@beis.gov.uk by 2pm on 7 July 2021. Questions submitted after this deadline may not be answered.

3. Submit proposals

This competition is now closed to applications.




        
      

      
    Published 3 June 2021
    Last updated 17 September 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 September 2021
              This competition is now closed to applications.
            
            
              15 June 2021
              Annex 5: Project cost breakdown form added.
            
            
              3 June 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration competition: Stream 2 first-of-a-kind prototypes (contracts) (closed to applications)
        Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration (LODES) competition (closed to applications)
        Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration competition: cross-cutting guidance
        Digitalising our energy system for net zero: strategy and action plan
        Flexibility Innovation Programme

  




      

    Collection

  


        Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration (LODES) competition (closed to applications)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Funding programmes

  


  

  


    
  


    