

What Is the Internet of Bodies?





To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video



Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn
Embed



Add to website or blog
<iframe src="https://www.rand.org/multimedia/video/2020/10/29/what-is-the-internet-of-bodies/_jcr_content/par/multimediavideoplaye.embed" width="580" height="326" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
Copy and paste the selected text
Transcript
Narrator
In the 20th century, wireless technology integrated with the human body was nothing more than science fiction. But today, Wi-Fi connected devices like heart rate monitors and sleep trackers have become common parts of American life. How has bionic technology evolved so quickly from science fiction to reality? And what could this Internet of Bodies mean for our lives moving forward? RAND researchers are studying this phenomenon and what consumers and policymakers need to know as we veer into uncharted territory.
Mary Lee, Mathematician; Fellow, RAND Center for Global Risk and Security
The Internet of Bodies, or IoB, is actually an ecosystem. It's a bunch of devices that are connected to the Internet that contain software and that either collect personal health data about you or can alter the body's function. We think of the Internet of Bodies as this collection of all these devices, as well as all the data that the devices are gathering about you. And in health care, Internet of Bodies has been around for quite a while. With the advent of the Internet, it makes a lot of sense to connect your pacemaker to the Internet so that your doctor can be automatically notified if something weird happens, if there's an anomaly. It's natural in a lot of ways to want to understand more about your body, how it functions, how well it's doing.
Narrator
IoB devices could revolutionize health care. Unprecedented amounts of personal health data could inform treatment plans that are completely tailored to a patient's needs.
Mary Lee
There are pills now that have an electronic sensor that let a health care provider know whether you have taken the medication. Other things, like precision medicine, so precision medicine is the idea of creating pharmaceuticals or treatment specifically for your body, for your personalized treatment. And I think IoB could really help with that because nowadays a lot of health care is based more on average reactions, whereas with data from IoB devices, you might be able to really more precisely treat a certain disease.
Narrator
But the Internet of Bodies won't be a cure-all. In fact, the largely unregulated market poses risks to the uniquely sensitive data these devices collect.
Mary Lee
First of all, there's the cyber risk of an actor potentially hacking into the system, whatever it might be. There's the privacy risk of all this data that's being collected, and the regulations about that data are really murky at the moment. And so there's not a lot of clarity into who owns the data, what happens to it, who it gets sold to, how it's being used. And there's even potentially national security and global security risks.
Narrator
A few examples of these risks have already played out in real life. For instance, in 2018, highly sensitive information about U.S. military activity and base locations was inadvertently revealed by soldiers' fitness trackers. So this is a pivotal moment. What can we do to make sure we reap the potential benefits of the Internet of Bodies without risking our privacy, security, and personal autonomy?
Mary Lee
Consumers should be wary of IoB devices because, as it's becoming more and more popular, all of this intimate data is being collected, arguably more intimate data than we've ever really recorded before. There's no clarity on what is being done with that data. You know, with an old mechanical pacemaker, there's no data that was being collected and stored, and, you know, you could look at a history of someone's heart rhythms.
Because policy tends to lag behind innovative technologies like this, it's probably up to the consumers and to the health care patients to really be aware of the devices that they're using and what is happening to their data and to know what the regulations are in their particular state, because it does vary so much state by state. Even if you think you're not interesting or that nothing will happen with your data, there are a lot of unknowns that I think we need to be careful about.Learn More

/content/rand/multimedia/video/2020/10/29/what-is-the-internet-of-bodies/jcr:content/par/wrapperdiv_copy/teaserlist



The Internet of Bodies: Opportunities, Risks, and GovernanceOct 29, 2020Mary Lee @MaryLee_PhD, Benjamin Boudreaux, et al.
Within the broader Internet of Things (IoT) lies a subset of devices that monitor the human body and transmit the collected data. What are the benefits, security and privacy risks, and ethical implications of the growing Internet of Bodies (IoB)?


The Internet of Bodies Will Change Everything, for Better or WorseOct 29, 2020
The rise of devices that connect the human body to the web is accelerating rapidly. This Internet of Bodies could revolutionize health care and improve our quality of life. But without appropriate guardrails, it could also jeopardize our most intimate personal information and introduce several ethical concerns.


The Perils of Connecting Our Bodies to the InternetOct 15, 2018Mary Lee @MaryLee_PhD
High-tech health care solutions are part of an emerging sector of medical technologies that monitor personal health data by essentially connecting your body to the Internet. As smart devices in health care evolve, the line between human and machine is blurring, and creating new concerns about consumer safety and privacy rights.




