The COVID-19 pandemic has affected every facet of life. Given pervasive uncertainty and public health concerns, the definition of customer experience has also evolved. Hitting the mark matters: companies that can reinforce their connection with customers and adapt their operations to meet changing needs have the potential to rebound more quickly after the economic downturn. In this podcast, McKinsey senior partner Kelly Ungerman weighs in on the changing face of retail, emerging customer preferences, and how companies can respond. Crafting an effective response involves viewing customer experience through three lenses: 

    
    

    Customers. Priorities have shifted to a greater emphasis on health, financial security, and the well-being of loved ones. 
    Companies. In-person interaction has decreased, customer contact has gone through the roof, and retailers have had to reimagine their entire operations. 
    Employees. Retailers can’t excel at customer experience without ensuring they are also creating a good employee experience. 
To help retailers get in front of customers’ preferences in the next normal, this podcast addresses vital topics: 
    Why customers’ rapid move to digital channels will be lasting
    What safe and contactless customer engagement will look like
    How retailers are innovating to meet customers where they are 
    Why a retailer’s motivation and communication matter more than ever
    How organizations can use agile as a catalyst to remake their operating model
For more details, please listen to the podcast or read the full transcript below. Additional insights can be found in the McKinsey article “.”
Podcast transcript Hello and welcome. You are listening to a podcast by McKinsey & Company focused on COVID-19 response. This is Amanda Schmitt, Global Risk Learning manager at McKinsey & Company. Today, I’ll be speaking with Kelly Ungerman, a senior partner in McKinsey’s Marketing and Sales practice, who is based out of Dallas, Texas.Today, Kelly will talk to us about the impact of COVID-19 on customer experience and the opportunities it creates to build positive customer relationships. Kelly, first question for you: What role does customer experience play in the COVID-19 crisis? It’s a great question, and I’ll answer it from three perspectives: first through the lens of customer, second through the lens of the companies themselves, and then the employees.For the customers, many, as you all know, are in a very vulnerable position right now, whether it’s, their health, their financial security, or just frankly their ability to balance so many different responsibilities—being a parent, caretaker, and teacher all at the same time. And we did a recent survey that said almost two-thirds of consumers are feeling anxious or depressed. And so, in this time, they’re really depending on companies to meet their needs around empathy, care, and concern.Through the lens of companies, companies overnight have seen their entire operations change, right? So shelter-in-place orders have meant that in-person interactions are no longer viable for many, call-center volumes are going through the roof because of much uncertainty, and many have shuttered hundreds or thousands of stores and branches with, frankly, real questions around when and how many they should reopen.In our view, customer experience leaders have an incredibly important role to play during this time, and ones that are doing it well are starting to break out of the pack. And they’re doing a few different things well. Many, especially the brick-and-mortar companies, have really accelerated in online, virtual, and contactless operations. We’ve seen lots of examples, whether it’s self-service operations in light of call volume, or just contactless delivery and payment options that many restaurants are doing to safeguard consumer health. I’m also very inspired by some of the innovative cross-industry partnerships that are creating even more robust home-delivery networks, or even some of the tech giants that are coming together to really accelerate contact tracing with interoperable systems.And then, across all of those, companies are really evolving their approach to consumer sentiment by moving beyond surveys or taking the pulse of consumers much more real-time—through social media and, many other mechanisms.Through the lens of the employees, it’s hard to talk about customer experience without talking about employee experience. And, you know, as the saying goes, “Happy customers start with happy employees,” and so we believe this is a very foundational part of delivering great customer experiences. And this is no more true than during a crisis like COVID-19. And this is not only caring for employees, but also tapping into them as a very valuable source of information, just given how rapidly consumer needs are really changing.One stat that I find interesting is 60 percent of employees say they believe that their ideas for improving the experience often go unheard. So leading companies will be listening now more than ever. And then when you step back across all of this, it’s not only the right thing to do for customers, but it actually pays off. And if you look at the last US recession, we saw that customer-experience leaders created three times higher returns for shareholders. So, all in all, it’s a win-win for customers, employees, and companies. Thanks for that context, Kelly. Let’s delve a bit further into that. Can you talk a bit about what companies should focus on to build and sustain customer relationships? Yeah. I think, on building and sustaining a customer relationship, the answer is a bit different during the early innings of a crisis versus when they’re starting to think about the recovery. And, early on, to the earlier conversation, it’s really critical to focus on empathy and authentic caring.This is a time to help, not market. It’s also a time to really focus on customer needs, like safety and security and health and hygiene, not their wants, right? So this is back to a bit of the hierarchy of needs. And it’s really important to make sure that tone and the voice of the actions and the words really stay true to the company’s purpose and values. And I’m finding, more than ever, the “why companies do something” is really important. Beyond the initial crisis, I’ve seen a number of themes and practices, and in my view are really separating customer experience leaders from others. And I’ll give a number of sort of themes and examples that may bring it to life. So, one is, and many have been doing this for a while, just minimizing risk and physical interaction.So grocery stores have really been at the forefront of this by implementing Plexiglas separators at the checkout for their employees, quickly adapting payment terminals so you can do contactless payments and checkouts, or just even adding extra opening hours for medical workers and elderly consumers. So that’s kind of one example.Another is actively contributing to the safety by innovating product portfolios. And we’ve seen some really impressive examples of companies that have turned both their product portfolio, but their associated manufacturing processes on a dime to do this—whether it’s the auto companies that have repurposed entire manufacturing capabilities to produce face masks, hand sanitizers, ventilators, or some of the additional PPE needed by the front line.Another example is helping alleviate some of the financial stress that many customers are feeling across the board. And this one is, in essence, putting your money where your mouth is around the offer to help. So whether it’s credit-card and insurance companies waiving cancellation or late fees, or airline companies and hotels are providing much more flexibility in bookings, or others like utility companies that have really sort of paused service termination, that are providing customers with some of the relief that they really desperately need right now.Others, on a more lighthearted note, are just bringing joy and bringing some fun and entertainment and appealing to some of the emotional needs of customers that are feeling trapped at home, like I’m guessing many of us are right now. Many of the entertainment and movie companies have taken steps to provide early access to new releases or additional content that may be helpful to, especially, parents during this time.And then a couple other examples are promoting and guiding the shift to online channels that has been so pervasive.And then just one final theme that we’re seeing is just this fundamental need of caring and giving back to the community. And this has taken lots of forms. It’s hard to turn on the TV without seeing a commercial that has a core theme around caring and concern—whether it’s delivering free meals to medical workers or donating to crisis-response efforts. There’s one company that’s shifted their entire seasonal marketing budget to support the Red Cross, and a number of other examples like that. Awesome. As a mom of young children, I can certainly speak to the value of Frozen 2 coming out a bit earlier. So let’s talk about the future. What should companies think about for the postcrisis world and recovery? There are examples that some parts of the world can learn from others who are at later stages of recovery. And the one thing we have seen is a lot of these fundamental shifts in consumer behavior are here to stay, right? Digital penetration has experienced several years’ worth of acceleration in just a few weeks and months, which is incredible.If you look at China as an example, there’s been a 55 percent increase in consumers intending to permanently shift to online grocery shopping. And so companies are asking themselves, “How do I respond and pivot my business model in light of these dramatic shifts and shifts that happen very quickly?”And a few things from our perspective that I think are very important. One is really using this as an opportunity to rethink your business model. And for some, that looks now much more digital led. Or some are saying, “Let’s do a digital-only model,” right, where the entire end-to-end experience is delivered digitally. Others are taking a much harder look at their networks—especially ones that have physical brick-and-mortar networks—and asking which stores they should shutter permanently, or in some cases which to convert to other types of stores. It could be fulfillment centers or dark stores, as in the case of online grocery. Or some playing much more the experiential role, but probably on a much smaller number of stores that are truly doing that. So that’s one big theme. There’s a second big theme around making some really thoughtful and targeted investments, and in some cases actually quite strategic bets around what you think a great experience is going to look like on the other end. As we said, much of the new behavior is going to be quite sticky, and one thing I’m seeing universally is safe and contactless experiences will become the new norm. So how do you get out ahead of that and really prioritize the journeys and experiences that are going to matter most to the customers in ways that weren’t as important two months ago.And then, finally, thinking through the operating model. Agile, in our view, has always been the right fundamental operating model for customer-experience transformations. But especially in a world where consumer preferences are changing so quickly, it’s critical to get out ahead of that and do things like rapid prototyping and iterating innovations in a sort of minimum-viable state, rather than waiting to perfect them and then, all of a sudden, consumer behavior has shifted again. So this notion of using this as a real catalyst to change your operating model is, in our view, very important. Great. Thanks so much for joining us today, Kelly. This has been really insightful. As we wrap up, what are two or three things you would like listeners to take away from this podcast? As I step back across the lessons of customer experience in the last recession and now, there’s a few things that I would say. One is customer experience really is recession-proof. And, again, the customer-experience leaders during good times and during recessions or crisis will lead, and they always outperform—and often by a factor of three.Two is, there’s a seismic shift in consumer behavior that is happening, and it’s really important to get out ahead and think about how do you want to adapt your customer experience, based on those shifts? Many of them will be digital, but they may come in different forms.And then finally, as many say, don’t ever let a good crisis go to waste. So using this as an opportunity to rethink and, if you have to, pivot your business model, your experience, and your operating model to emerge even stronger than ever.