
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    UKAEA Privacy Notice for Employment
  

  
  

  
    
  A guide to the data UKAEA collects as part of its recruitment process, and how this data is used.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          UK Atomic Energy Authority

      
      Published
      30 September 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    UKAEA Privacy Notice for Employment
    
        PDF, 114KB, 3 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email foienquiries@ukaea.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
Under the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) you have a right to know why and how we process your personal data. As an organisation we need you to be clear about what we do with information that we collect from you. We will only collect information that is necessary for us to undertake certain tasks, for example your employment, tax and National Insurance obligations.

Your privacy is important to us. This privacy statement explains what personal data UKAEA (referred to in this document as ‘we’) collect from you and how we use it. We encourage you to read the summaries below.

The identity and contact details of UKAEA and our Data Protection Officer
UKAEA will be what’s known as the ‘Controller’ of the personal data you provide to us. UKAEA has an inhouse Data Protection Officer and they can be contacted at dataprotection@ukaea.uk if you have any questions.

Categories of personal data

Personal data:
The GDPR applies to ‘personal data’, meaning any information relating to an identifiable person who can be directly or indirectly identified, in particular by reference to an identifier.

This includes your name, identification number, location data or online identifier and the GDPR is addressing changes in technology and the way organisations collect information about people.

The GDPR applies to both automated personal data and to manual filing systems where personal data is accessible according to specific criteria. This could include chronologically ordered sets of manual records containing personal data.

Personal data that has been pseudonymised – e.g. key-coded – can fall within the scope of the GDPR depending on how difficult it is to attribute the pseudonym to a particular individual.

Sensitive personal data:

  Racial or ethnic origin
  Political opinions
  Religious or philosophical beliefs
  Trade union membership
  Genetic data, biometric data
  Data concerning health
  Data concerning a person’s sex life or sexual orientation


Why we are collecting your personal data
UKAEA collects data to operate effectively and for the legitimate interests of your employment. You provide this data directly, when you are going through the recruitment process and as a new employee, including the security clearance process.

We may also request data on your health prior to employment and during your employment for any injuries or health issues you may have. This helps us to facilitate any reasonable adjustments you may require through the course of your employment in order to assist you in your role.

We need the personal data we request in order to process your pay and any allowances. We also will use your data to comply with legislation such as tax and National Insurance and any safety aspects that form part of your role.

Why we are collecting your sensitive personal data
We need your sensitive personal data in order to produce reports to ensure we are attracting and recruiting inclusively and across a diverse pool of candidates. The data is not used in a way that can create bias within recruiting processes, as it is hidden and used only for reporting purposes.

With whom will we be sharing the data
We will need to share your details with the National Insurance and tax offices. We may need to share your data with:


  Occupational Health: for any health-related queries, your explicit consent will be sought prior to contact with UKAEA’s OH department;
  Pension Provider for UKAEA: should you request a pension statement or wish to opt out;
  Payroll Provider: for the purposes of processing your pay and allowances;
  Auditors: for the purposes of internal and government audits;
  Travel provider to UKAEA: for the purposes of organising work travel.


How long will we keep your data?
Due to the nature of our business, we retain personal files for 85 years. This is so we can comply with legislation due to health and safety requirements.

Your rights, e.g. access, rectification, erasure
The data we are collecting is your personal data, and you have considerable say over what happens to it. You have the right:


  To see what data we have about you and re-use your own data that we have collected;
  To ask us to stop using your data, but keep it on record unless it is being used in the legitimate interests of your employment as outlined above;
  To have all or some of your data deleted or corrected where there is no compelling reason for its continued processing;
  To lodge a complaint with the independent Information Commissioner (ICO) if you think we are not handling your data fairly or in accordance with the law.  You can contact the ICO at https://ico.org.uk/, or telephone 0303 123 1113;
  The right to withdraw consent at any time (where relevant).


This data:


  Will not be sent overseas;
  Will not be used for any automated decision making;
  Will be stored in a secure IT system.




        
      

      
    Published 30 September 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Scientific research and development

  


  

  


    
  


    