
      


  
    


  
  
    Assistive Technology Impact Fund
  

  
  
  
    
  Combines grant capital with expert-led venture-building support, to support Assistive Technology innovators launch and scale solutions in Africa.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      10 February 2021
  

    
    
    
  






  
      
    
      Funds: 
      Open
      Countries: 
      
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Congo (Democratic Republic), Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, The, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe

      Sector: 
      
Disabilities, Innovation, Private sector/business, Technology

      Eligible organisations: 
      
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs), UK-based non-profit organisations, UK-based small and diaspora organisations, Companies, Educational institutions, Humanitarian relief organisations

      Value of funding: 
      
£10,001 to £100,000, £500,001 to £1,000,000

    
  


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          What the fund will achieve

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Background information on the fund

        
        
          Contacts

        
    

      
    


      
        

    
          

Applications are welcome until the deadline on 31 March 2022.


Overview
The AT Impact Fund (ATIF) enables innovative technology solutions to better reach people with disabilities in Africa, by supporting AT ventures with up to £200K in grant capital, to test business models that can enable AT innovators to scale. Selected ventures receive 6+ months of tailored venture building support, expert coaching, brokering of partners and connections to investors to help them scale and access to a network of disability pioneers. Our programme runs for 18 months, starting September 2020, with each company having our support over a 6 to 12 month window within this period.

What the fund will achieve
The AT Impact Fund aims to increase each grantee’s chance of long term sustainable success, by supporting them each on a path to scale, and overcoming known barriers to scale within the AT sector.

You will be eligible for AT Impact Fund support, if you:


  are an entrepreneur committed to bringing AT innovations (e.g. hearing assessment and hearing aid devices, eye testing and eyeglasses, prosthetics solutions and innovative means of their production, mobility solutions etc.) to people with disabilities in Africa
  are looking to scale your AT innovation in an African market(s)
  have some evidence of business model traction in an African market


or if you:


  are an entrepreneur growing a distribution, financing or innovative manufacturing venture that could play a role getting AT to the populations in Africa


How to apply
To apply, or for more information, please go to the Assistive Tech Impact Fund website. Applications are welcome until the deadline on 31 March 2022.

Background information on the fund
The AT Impact Fund is a collaboration between GDI Hub, Brink and Catalyst Fund. The partnership combines deep expertise in AT, innovation and venture building in Africa, respectively. The fund forms part of the UK Aid-funded AT2030 programme, led by the Global Disability Innovation (GDI) Hub.  AT2030 tests ‘what works’ to improve access to life-changing Assistive Technology for all; investing £20m over 5 years to support solutions to scale. AT2030 will reach 9 million directly and 9 million more indirectly, driving a lifetime of potential. AT2030 is operational in 31 countries globally.

Contacts
The AT Impact Fund is led by GDI Hub, under the UK Aid funded AT2030 programme.





      

      
        
    Published 10 February 2021


      


      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Technology Provider Registration for Frontier Technologies
        Emergency Humanitarian Response Zambia
        Humanitarian Response Funding: guidelines for NGOs
        NIHR Global Health Research Units
        Global Innovation Fund

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        International aid and development

  


  

  


    
  


    