
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Coronavirus (COVID-19): advice for UK visa applicants and temporary UK residents
  

  
  
  
      
  This is advice for visa customers and applicants in the UK, visa customers outside of the UK and British nationals overseas who need to apply for a passport affected by travel restrictions associated with coronavirus.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office and UK Visas and Immigration

      
      Published
      24 March 2020
      Last updated
      
        15 December 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          If you’re in the UK

        
        
          If you’re working for the NHS

        
        
          If you’re outside the UK

        
        
          If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life

        
        
          If you want to cancel your visa

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
If you’re in the UK

You are expected to take all reasonable steps to leave the UK where it is possible to do so or apply to regularise your stay in the UK. You are allowed to access Visa and Immigration services as these are considered an essential public service. You must follow current COVID-19 rules for where you live, in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

If you intend to leave the UK to return to a country or territory but have not been able to do so and you have a visa, leave or ‘exceptional assurance’ that expires before 31 January 2022 you may request additional time to stay, known as ‘exceptional assurance’.

This is for individuals whose country of residence is red-listed or exceptional cases where you may be unable to return to a country or territory where that nation has closed their borders or where quarantine facilities are temporarily over-subscribed.

Please submit your request for an ‘exceptional assurance’ by emailing cihassuranceteam@homeoffice.gov.uk with the following details:


  full name
  date of birth
  nationality
  Home Office, GWF or any other reference number
  type of visa
  expiry date of visa
  reason for request
  evidence showing reason you can’t leave


The subject header of your email should read “Request for an assurance”.

In your email you should attach evidence to show why you cannot leave the UK. For example, evidence of your inability to book quarantine accommodation in your country of residence.

During the time in which your request for ‘exceptional assurance’ is pending you will continue on the conditions as per your current or most recently expired visa.

If you are granted ‘exceptional assurance’ it will act as a short-term protection against any adverse action or consequences after your leave has expired. If conditions allowed you to work, study or rent accommodation you may continue to do so during the period of your ‘exceptional assurance’. ‘Exceptional assurance’ does not grant you leave. It is a means to protect those who are unable to leave the UK due to COVID-19 restrictions and not to facilitate travel, other than to return home.

If you’ve already been given assurance but your circumstances have changed or you’re unable to leave the UK by the assurance date previously given, you must reapply using the process above. You will need to clearly state that you’re making a subsequent application. You’ll be asked to provide new supporting evidence.

If you intend to stay in the UK

In order to remain in the UK, you will need to apply for the relevant permission to stay. Where eligible, you’ll be able to submit a permission to stay application form from within the UK.

You can make an application for permission to stay in the UK if you hold permission in a route that would normally allow you to do so.

You’ll need to meet the requirements of the route you’re applying for and pay the UK application fee. You will not be able to apply for a route for which there is no provision in the Immigration Rules for making an in-country application, such as Youth Mobility Scheme, or Adult Dependant Relative.

The terms of your current permission will remain the same until your application is decided. If you are switching into work or study routes you may be able to commence work or study whilst your application is under consideration, depending on the terms of your current permission.

You are also able to apply for permission to stay to remain in the UK if you have been issued with an ‘exceptional assurance’. You must submit your application before the expiry of your ‘exceptional assurance’.

If you are in the UK but your Entry Clearance was not activated due to COVID-19 restrictions

If you entered the United Kingdom outside the 30 and 90 day window allowed by your Entry Clearance vignette due to COVID-19 impacts, and your Entry Clearance was not activated as a result, then you can apply to remain in the United Kingdom without having to return overseas or reapply.

By following the process below, you are able to vary the leave and conditions granted on arrival to match the conditions of your Entry Clearance. This will not require any fee to be paid.

In order to accept this offer please e-mail ECActivation@homeoffice.gov.uk with the following details:


  a photo of yourself
  a photo of your Entry Clearance vignette and passport biodata page
  a photo of the Entry stamp in your passport
  details of how your travel was impacted by COVID-19 regulations
  residential address where an updated Biometric Residence Permit (BRP) can be returned


An updated BRP will then be sent to you with the correct conditions.

If you have overstayed your leave

If your visa or leave expired between 24 January 2020 and 31 August 2020 there will be no future adverse immigration consequences if you didn’t make an application to regularise your stay during this period. However, if you have not applied to regularise your stay or submitted a request for an exceptional assurance you must make arrangements to leave the UK.

Application and service centres in the UK

UKVCAS Service Points are essential services and will remain open throughout the UK so customers can continue to book and attend appointments to progress their visa applications.

Service and Support Centres (SSCs) are essential services and remain open. SSCs are offering a reduced number of appointments because of coronavirus. As more appointments are made available UKVI will invite you to arrange an appointment by email or post.

If you’re a Student or Child Student applicant in the UK and have given your fingerprints before

If you’re applying in the UK as a Student or Child Student (including Tier 4 student), UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) may be able to reuse your fingerprints.

If UKVI can reuse the fingerprints you’ve already given, you’ll be emailed with instructions on how to send them an image of your face and your supporting documents.

This will mean you do not have to attend a UKVCAS or an SSC service point appointment to provide biometric information.

If you cannot send the information through the instructions given, you’ll be able to book an appointment.

English language testing centres in the UK

You can book a test at most of the approved English Testing Centres in the UK.

For more information on how you can book your English Language Test, contact either:


  your test centre
  Trinity College London
  International English Language Testing System (IELTS)
  LanguageCert website
  Pearson Test of English


If you have a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) visa and your business has been disrupted

You no longer need to employ at least 2 people for 12 consecutive months. The 12 month period you’re required to employ someone for can be made up of multiple jobs across different months but this must be equivalent to 2 full time jobs.

Time when your employees were furloughed will count towards the 12 month period if they have been paid at least 80% of their normal salary.

If you’ve not been able to employ staff for 12 months by the time your visa expires, you’ll be allowed to extend your stay for a further 2 years, if you can show:


  you‘ve created at least 2 jobs by the date you apply
  you’ve been unable to employ staff for 12 months due to coronavirus


If you have a Start-up visa and your business has been disrupted

You can apply for additional leave of 12 months. This will allow your Start-up visa to go beyond the normal maximum 2-year period so you can continue developing your business against your agreed business plan.

You must meet the requirements of the route as normal, including being endorsed by an endorsing body.  Your endorsing body must assess your business and be satisfied that reasonable progress has been made, taking into consideration the impact of coronavirus and that the business remains viable.

Your endorsing body must provide you with an endorsement letter. This must state it is an application for a temporary extension by completing the relevant sections and providing the required information, within the endorsement letter.

If you’ve applied for a Student or Child Student visa (including Tier 4 visas) and are waiting for a decision on your application

You can start your course or studies before your visa application has been decided if:


  your sponsor is a Student sponsor
  you have been given a confirmation of acceptance for studies (CAS)
  you submitted your application before your current visa expired and you show your sponsor evidence of this
  the course you start is the same as the one listed on your CAS
  you have a valid Academic Technology Approval Scheme (ATAS) certificate if required


If your application is eventually rejected as invalid or refused you must stop your course or studies.

If you’ve applied for a Health and Care Worker visa and are waiting for a decision on your application

You can start work before your visa application has been decided if:


  you’ve been assigned a Certificate of Sponsorship (CoS) and you’re applying under the Health and Care visa
  you submitted your application before your current visa expired and you show your sponsor evidence of this
  the job you start is the same as the one listed on your CoS


If your application is eventually rejected as invalid or refused your sponsor will stop sponsoring you and you must stop working for them. You should either leave the UK or seek to regularise your immigration status if this happens.

If you are not applying under the Health and Care visa, you must wait until your visa application has been granted before starting work, unless your current visa allows you to work in that job.

If you need more information about the measures in place for students and their sponsors

You can read detailed guidance on the temporary measures in place for Student sponsors, their students and short-term students in response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.

If you’re working for the NHS

If you work in healthcare and your visa expires between 1 April 2021 and 30 September 2021

You may be eligible for a free extension to your visa. If you’re eligible, your dependants (partner and children under the age of 18) could also get their visas extended for a year.

You and your dependants will not have to pay the Immigration Health Surcharge.

If your visa is due to expire after 30 September 2021, or you are changing employer, you cannot extend your visa for free.

Find out more in the visa extensions for health workers during coronavirus (COVID-19) guidance.

If you’ll be working at a different NHS site than your usual place of work because of coronavirus

You can work at any NHS hospital during the coronavirus outbreak if your sponsor can maintain their sponsorship duties.

Sponsors will not need to notify UKVI of the change in your place of work.

If you do any different or extra work due to coronavirus

You can carry out supplementary work in any role at any skill level during the coronavirus outbreak. There is no restriction on the number of hours you can work.

Changes to the current restrictions on the number of hours you can work or volunteer

There is no longer a limit on the number of hours you can work or volunteer each week if you’re a:


  Student (including Tier 4 student) working for the NHS in a list profession
  worker with a Skilled Work, Health and Care Work, Intra-company Transfer or T2 Worker visa and your NHS job is a second job
  visiting academic researcher
  holder of a short-term visa and are permitted to volunteer


If you’re a pre-registration nurse or midwife on the Temporary Register in the UK

The deadline for you to sit the Occupational Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) has been extended to 30 September 2021. If you do not pass on the first attempt, you’ll have until 31 December 2021 to pass the exam.

If you’re working on coronavirus research

If you’re a scientist researching coronavirus (COVID-19), you may be able to apply for a Global Talent visa using the UKRI endorsed funder option. Find out about the requirements for coronavirus researchers.

If you’re outside the UK


If you’re planning to travel to the UK, you’ll need to make sure you comply with all COVID-19 travel restrictions. Please check the travel advice issued by your carrier and check what you need to do before entering the UK.


What you must do before you travel to England and after you arrive depends on whether you qualify as fully vaccinated under the rules for travel to England.

There are different rules if you have been in a red list country or territory in the 10 days before you arrive in England.

Separate guidance is available if you’re entering Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

Applying for a UK visa

There are changes at the UK border because of coronavirus (COVID-19).

You should consider guidance on entering the UK and travel to England from another country during coronavirus (COVID-19) before you apply for a visa. You should also check the travel advice issued by your carrier and check what you need to do before you leave for the UK.

If you’re applying for a visitor visa


Standard UK visitor visas are currently taking longer than usual to be processed due to high global demand. You should bear this in mind when making travel arrangements.

UKVI are working hard to process applications as soon as possible.

You will be contacted by the Visa Application Centre (VAC) when your passport is ready for collection. Do not attend the VAC until you have been invited to do so.

You are not required to book any travel before you apply or before a decision is made on your application. You’ll only be refunded if we have not started processing your application.


If you need to travel urgently to the UK for compassionate reasons, you’ll still need to apply for a visa in the usual way, including submitting biometrics at your chosen VAC. You should clearly explain the compelling or compassionate reasons for your visit in your application form and must alert the VAC staff during biometric submission. You’ll be contacted by UKVI once your application has been received.

If you do not hear from UKVI or your request is exceptionally urgent, you can also contact UK Visas and Immigration for help. Please note that this is a chargeable service for overseas customers.

If you’re a child coming to school in the UK

If you are a boarding school student and are under 18 coming to study at a UK boarding school, you may isolate at accommodation provided or arranged by your boarding school.

Exemptions to managed quarantine requirements

The Department of Health and Social Care has laid out a limited number of scenarios where an individual may apply for an exemption from the requirement to enter managed quarantine on arrival in the UK on medical and compassionate grounds.

Visa Application Centres (VACs)

Most UK Visa Application Centres (VACs) have resumed services where local restrictions allow.

Priority and super priority services are only available in some locations. If available, you’ll be able to purchase these services when booking your appointment.

For more information, and for updates to the status of VACs, including opening times in your country, check with:


  
TLS contact if you’re in Europe, Africa and parts of the Middle East
  
VFS global for all other countries


Ongoing global restrictions mean some UKVI services will remain closed. Where services are resuming, existing customers will be contacted.

English language tests are available in most countries but may be temporarily suspended in some countries due to coronavirus restrictions. You can find a list of all approved test centres outside the UK. Check the SELT provider’s website to find out when tests are available and to make sure the test centre is open. Do not contact the test centre directly.

For more information on how you can book your English Language Test, contact either:


  your test centre
  International English Language Testing System (IELTS)
  LanguageCert
  Pearson Test of English
  PSI (Services) UK Ltd


Applying for a visa if your visa application centre (VAC) is closed

You can apply for a visit visa from any UK VAC. You should apply for all other UK visas from the country you’re living in.

If your VAC is closed due to coronavirus restrictions, you can apply online and select a VAC in another country worldwide to submit your application and biometrics. You’ll need to make sure you’re permitted to travel to that country beforehand.

You’ll be able to make any type of UK visa application. You must select the country where you would like to  submit your biometrics at the start of your application.

This concession has been extended to 31 December 2021.

If you’ve already submitted your application through Access UK and now intend to submit your new application at a different VAC from the one selected in that application, you’ll need to make a new application and select the VAC where you’ll submit your application.

You’ll need to pay the fee associated with your new application and request a refund for your earlier application.

Getting your documents when a VAC is closed due to COVID-19 restrictions

As VACs reopen their services, we will prioritise returning customer passports.

If the VAC where you applied is still closed we will not be able to return your passport.

If your passport is in a VAC, and a decision on your application has been made, the VAC will contact you to arrange collection.

If your application has not been decided, we will not contact you to return your passport until it has. If you would like your passport returned, even if your application has not been decided, please contact the VAC to arrange collection.

To see if the VAC is open for passport return in your country, check with:


  
TLS contact if you’re in Europe, Africa and parts of the Middle East
  
VFS global for all other countries


We are continuing to reopen more VACs where local restrictions allow and social distancing can be maintained.

British nationals abroad who need to apply for a passport

Her Majesty’s Passport Office is accepting online passport applications.

If you’re advised that you must book an appointment at your nearest VAC to submit your passport application, you should check if it’s open.

If your country’s VAC is still closed, you won’t be able to apply for a British passport until it reopens.

If you urgently need to travel to the UK, you should contact the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) to discuss your options. You can also check the latest travel advice from the FCO.

If you’re applying for a Global Talent visa

If your endorsement from an endorsing body has expired because you’ve not been able to make an application for a visa, you may still be eligible.

Your endorsement will be accepted if both:


  it was granted on or after 24 January 2020
  you apply for your visa before 1 January 2021


Applications that do not meet these requirements will be considered on a case by case basis.

If you’re applying for a Start-up or Innovator visa

If your endorsement from an endorsing body has expired because you’ve not been able to travel to the UK, you may still be eligible for a visa. We will consider all applications on a case by case basis.

If your 90 day visa vignette to work or join family has expired

If your 90 day vignette has expired, you will need to apply for a replacement by completing the online form. The cost of replacing an expired 90 day vignette is £154 and you will need to make an appointment to resubmit your biometric information.

We strongly advise that you only apply for a new visa, or apply to replace an expired vignette, when you are confident you can travel to the UK. The new vignette will be valid for a period of 90 days. If you cannot travel during this time, you may need to apply again to update your vignette.

If you have submitted an application for a replacement vignette, and are still awaiting a decision, but now no longer intend to travel, you should submit a withdrawal request at the Visa Application Centre that you applied from in order for your passport to be released back to you.

If you are a student and your 90 day student visa vignette has expired

If your 90 day visa vignette has expired and you either:


  have been unable to travel due to coronavirus, but have been undertaking your studies remotely from overseas and intend to travel to study the same course in the UK
  have completed an eligible course by distance learning under coronavirus concessions and are coming to the UK by the relevant date to apply under the Graduate route. Read the guidance for further information


You will need to make a paid application for a vignette transfer by completing the online form. The cost of replacing an expired 90 day vignette is £154 and you will need to make an appointment to resubmit your biometric information.

If your 90 day visa vignette has expired and you either:


  have deferred your course start date due to coronavirus but have been unable to undertake your studies remotely, meaning that your course cannot be completed during your existing visa period, and you now intend to travel to the UK
  can still complete your course within the dates covered by your existing visa period, but your course end date has changed, and you would like a new visa with a revised end date


You will need to submit a new paid student visa application with a new Certificate of Acceptance of Study (CAS) to cover the revised dates of your course. You will also need to make an appointment to resubmit your biometric information.


When you arrive in the UK you will not be penalised for being unable to collect your biometric residence permit (BRP) while coronavirus measures are in place.


If you’ve remained outside the UK for over 2 years and due to coronavirus travel restrictions your indefinite leave has lapsed

Your Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK (ILR) or Indefinite Leave to Enter the UK (ILE) will lapse if you are absent from the UK for over 2 years.

If your ILR/ILE lapsed on or after 24 January 2020, and you’ve been unable to return to the UK due to travel restrictions in place relating to coronavirus, you may apply under the Returning Resident visa route to return to the UK and get indefinite leave.

You need to complete the online Returning Resident application form and pay the fee. As part of your application you’ll need to explain how coronavirus restrictions prevented your return to the UK.

You’ll receive a refund of the application fee and, where applicable, a refund of £55 if you submitted your application at a Mandatory User Pay Visa Application Centre. Confirmation of your refund will be sent to you by email once we’ve made a decision on your application.

If you’ve already been issued a Returning Resident visa

If you’ve already obtained a Returning Resident visa because your ILR/ILE lapsed on or after 24 January 2020 and you were unable to return to the UK due to travel restrictions in place relating to coronavirus, you may be eligible for a refund of your visa fee.

You will need to email CovidRRR@fco.gov.uk.

Use the subject heading ‘Returning Resident Refund Request’ followed by the GWF number you received when you submitted your application.

Your email must be in English and you must also provide:


  your name
  date of birth
  any unique Home Office reference numbers, including your payment reference for the visa fee


If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life

If you have been unable to travel back to the UK due to coronavirus travel restrictions and your leave expired between 1 March 2020 and 19 July 2021, a short break of up to 6 months in continuous residence will be overlooked and you will face no future adverse immigration consequences as a result. However, you are expected to make your next application as soon as possible on return. Those who have returned to the UK and did not make a valid application to stay upon re-entry, are expected to make arrangements to leave.

If you’re here with 6 months’ leave as a fiancé, fiancée or proposed civil partner the current family Immigration Rules allow you to apply for an extension of leave if there is good reason for your wedding or civil partnership not taking place during the initial 6 month period of leave to enter. Cancellation of a wedding or civil partnership ceremony due to COVID-19 will be considered a good reason under this policy.

Changes to the minimum income and adequate maintenance requirement

If you’ve experienced a loss of income due to coronavirus up to 31 October 2021, we will consider employment income for the period immediately before the loss of income, provided the minimum income requirement was met for at least 6 months immediately before the date the income was lost.

If your salary was reduced because you were furloughed we will take account of your income as though you’re earning 100% of your salary.

If you’re self-employed, a loss of annual income due to coronavirus between 1 March 2020 and 31 October 2021 will usually be disregarded, along with the impact on employment income from the same period for future applications.

The concessions have not been extended beyond 31 October 2021. Any income loss after this date will not be taken into account within the financial concessions listed above and applicants will be expected to meet minimum income and adequate maintenance requirements as per pre-pandemic levels.

If you’re unable to provide specified documents

In some cases we will be able to decide your application without seeing certain specified documents, if you cannot get them due to coronavirus, until 31 December 2021. Otherwise, you may be asked to submit the specified documents after the date of application.

Changes to the English language requirement

If you’re asked to take an English language test as part of your application, you can apply for an exemption if the test centre was closed or you couldn’t travel to it due to coronavirus when you applied.

If you want to cancel your visa

Read the guidance on how to cancel your visa, immigration or citizenship application because of coronavirus.


If your query doesn’t relate to immigration provisions associated with coronavirus, please contact the general immigration helpline.






      
        
    Published 24 March 2020
    Last updated 15 December 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              15 December 2021
              Updated to reflect removal of the red list at 4:00am on 15 December 2021.
            
            
              7 December 2021
              Guidance updated - you cannot use the ‘priority service’ or ‘super priority service’ if you’re applying from a country or territory on the red list for international travel.
            
            
              26 November 2021
              Updated information on individuals currently in the UK and seeking to apply for 'exceptional assurance', highlighting that UKVCAS service points remain open and appointments are available and confirmation that a pause on assessing visit visas in red list locations has been introduced with for those countries added to the red list from today.
            
            
              19 November 2021
              Updated section "If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life".
            
            
              18 November 2021
              Information on applying for a visitor visa has been updated.
            
            
              1 November 2021
              Guidance updated to take account of changes to travel restrictions.
            
            
              11 October 2021
              Updated page due to red list changes.
            
            
              5 October 2021
              Updated page due to the simplified travel system which came into force on 4 October.
            
            
              28 September 2021
              Updated 'If you're in the UK' section.
            
            
              1 September 2021
              Updated "If you intend to stay in the UK" and “If you’re outside the UK” sections.
            
            
              25 August 2021
              Updated the section "If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life".
            
            
              12 August 2021
              Paragraphs under the heading 'If you’re a child coming to school in the UK' added to the 'If you’re outside the UK' content area.
            
            
              3 August 2021
              Updated information for student if your 90 day student visa vignette has expired.
            
            
              19 July 2021
              Removed paragraph relating to enrolment of biometrics at Post Office branches from paragraph entitled 'Application and service centres in the UK'.
            
            
              19 July 2021
              Changes to the If you’re outside the UK section and paragraphs under heading 'If you’re outside the UK and your leave has expired before you are able to return' removed to reflect end of concession on 19 July 2021.
            
            
              13 July 2021
              Updated Returning Resident visa refund request email to CovidRRR@fco.gov.uk.
            
            
              5 July 2021
              Updated section 'If you're outside the UK and your leave has expired before you are able to return' as the concession has been extended to 19 July 2021.
            
            
              1 July 2021
              Updated information under the If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life section.
            
            
              29 June 2021
              Date until which people may apply for 'exceptional assurance' extended to 30 September 2021.
            
            
              24 June 2021
              Guidance added for people whose Entry Clearance was not activated because of COVID-19 restrictions.
            
            
              17 June 2021
              Date of the VAC concessions has been extended until 31 December 2021.
            
            
              11 June 2021
              Updates to section: "If you’re applying for a visitor visa".
            
            
              11 June 2021
              Revised dates published in the following sections:
'If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life',
'Changes to the minimum income and adequate maintenance requirement'
            
            
              1 June 2021
              'If you intend to stay in the UK' section - updated guidance on being able to exceptionally make an application in the UK under Covid-19 concessions.
            
            
              19 May 2021
              Concession for people who are outside the UK, and their leave has expired before they were able to return, has been extended to 21 June 2021.
            
            
              14 May 2021
              Guidance on travel from Red, Amber, Green list countries published.
            
            
              5 May 2021
              If you are in a red list country and wish to apply for a visitor in transit or direct airside transit visa (DATV) we are now able to process your application, as the pause on issuing transit visas has been lifted.
            
            
              21 April 2021
              Changed expiry date for free visa extensions for NHS workers to 30 September 2021.
            
            
              26 March 2021
              Under 'Applying for a visa if your visa application centre (VAC) is closed', the date by which you can use the alternative arrangements has been extended to 30 June 2021. (It was previously 31 March 2021.)
            
            
              23 March 2021
              Amended ‘If you’re in the UK’ section, updating exceptional assurance visa or leave expiry date to 30 June 2021.
            
            
              19 March 2021
              Amended ‘If you’re in the UK’ section, updating exceptional assurance visa or leave expiry date to 30 April 2021.
            
            
              4 March 2021
              Updated guidance in the 'if you intend to stay in the UK' section.
            
            
              1 March 2021
              Amended 'If you're in the UK' section, updating exceptional assurance visa or leave expiry dates to between 1 March 2021 and 31 March 2021.
            
            
              15 February 2021
              Added new information under "New coronavirus testing and quarantine rules" section.
            
            
              5 February 2021
              Updated guidance for 'If you're applying for a visitor visa, visa in transit or direct airside transit visa (DAT)'.

Added guidance for 'If you've remained outside the UK for over 2 years and due to coronavirus travel restrictions your indefinite leave has lapsed'.

Added guidance for those who have already obtained a Returning Resident visa because their indefinite leave lapsed on or after 24 January 2020.
            
            
              27 January 2021
              Updated 'If you're outside the UK' section to include information about applying for a visa to the UK.
            
            
              27 January 2021
              The concessions to the family and private life section have been extended until 31 May 2021.
            
            
              18 January 2021
              Updated content under 'If you intend to stay in the UK' section.
            
            
              17 January 2021
              Updated exceptional assurance visa expiry dates to 1 January 2021 and 28 February 2021.
            
            
              12 January 2021
              Added information for those outside the UK whose leave has expired before they are able to return to the UK and updated information referring to the free replacement of expired vignettes.
            
            
              7 January 2021
              Added continuation of service notice regarding new coronavirus restrictions.
            
            
              6 January 2021
              Added information on Occupational Structured Clinical Examination deadline extension.
            
            
              23 December 2020
              Updated content under 'If you intend to stay in the UK' and 'If you’ve applied for a work visa and are waiting for a decision on your application' sections.
            
            
              16 December 2020
              Updated guidance.
            
            
              10 December 2020
              Updated content under 'If your 30 day visa to work, study or join family has expired' section.
            
            
              10 December 2020
              Updated information for Tier 1 Entrepreneur and Start-up visa holders.
            
            
              10 December 2020
              Updated to explain that the period for requesting exceptional assurance has been extended.
            
            
              23 November 2020
              Updated information about how to submit request for exceptional assurance because of technical difficulties with the online form.
            
            
              23 November 2020
              Updated to include visa extension for healthcare workers whose visa expires between 1 October 2020 and 31 March 2021.
            
            
              19 November 2020
              Updated UK VAC concession to 31 March 2021.
            
            
              5 November 2020
              Updated information to explain that overseas services will remain open but dependent on local country restrictions, and that our in-country immigration services (UK Visa and Citizenship Application Services, Service and Support Centres and English Language Test centres) will remain open. 

Updated 'If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life' section to explain that the period for requesting exceptional assurance has been extended.
            
            
              1 November 2020
              Updated information for if you're in the UK and your visa or leave expires between 1 November and 30 November 2020. 

Updated 'If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life' section to include information about the job support scheme and family emergency cases.
            
            
              16 October 2020
              Updated family and private visa concession and loss of income information.
            
            
              12 October 2020
              Updated 'Applying for a visa if your VAC is closed' to add that customers can now apply for a visit visa from any VAC.
            
            
              24 September 2020
              Added guidance on if you're a Tier 4 student applicant in the UK and have given your fingerprints before.
            
            
              16 September 2020
              Updated guidance on applying for a visa if your VAC is closed, for those who have already applied online and now wish to submit their application at a different VAC than the one they selected.

Updated 'If you're in the UK' to note that if conditions allowed you to work, study or rent accommodation you may continue to do so during the period of your exceptional assurance.
            
            
              4 September 2020
              Updated to clarify for those whose visa or leave expires after 31 August 2020.
            
            
              24 August 2020
              Updated guidance on 'Applying for a visa if your VAC is closed'.
            
            
              14 August 2020
              Updated the 'If you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life' section.

Added information on applying for a visa if your VAC is closed.
            
            
              11 August 2020
              Updated to add information on if your endorsement has expired for a Global Talent, Start-up or Innovator visa.
            
            
              7 August 2020
              Updated to add a link to the coronavirus immigration helpline contact form.
            
            
              3 August 2020
              Updated to reference that most UK Visa Application Centres (VACs) have resumed services where local restrictions allow.
            
            
              30 July 2020
              Updated to clarify for those whose visa or leave expires before 31 August 2020.
            
            
              29 July 2020
              Updated information if you’re in the UK and your leave expired between 24 January 2020 and 31 July 2020.
            
            
              20 July 2020
              Added information on how to request a replacement visa for if your 30 day visa to work, study or join family has expired.
            
            
              8 July 2020
              Added Pearson Test of English to the list of English Testing Centres.
            
            
              2 July 2020
              Updated process on biometric information.
            
            
              1 July 2020
              Added link to guidance for applicants in New Zealand who applied through an enrolment location operated by Immigration New Zealand.

Added information on concessions for Global Talent visa applicants who are working on coronavirus research.
            
            
              26 June 2020
              Updated to clarify information for those in the UK whose visa will expire after 31 July 2020 but need to urgently make a new application.
            
            
              26 June 2020
              Updated to clarify that the reopening of VAC locations remains subject to local circumstances.
            
            
              22 June 2020
              Updated to add information on some VACs reopening.
            
            
              15 June 2020
              Updated information on Service and Support Centres, English language tests, and 90 day validity of replacement visas.
            
            
              9 June 2020
              Added a new section on temporary concessions if you’re applying to enter the UK or remain on the basis of family or private life.
            
            
              8 June 2020
              Updated information if you are outside the UK, getting your documents and for British nationals abroad who need to apply for a passport.
            
            
              29 May 2020
              Updated section on applying for a British passport from overseas.
            
            
              28 May 2020
              Response times updated.
            
            
              26 May 2020
              Updated information on UK Visa and Citizenship Application Centres (UKVCAS) and UK Visa Application Centres (VACs). Added a link to guidance on how to cancel your visa. Added a link to the latest information on changes at the border.
            
            
              22 May 2020
              Visa extensions for those unable to leave the UK because of coronavirus have been extended to 31 July 2020. 


The deadline for making an application from the UK to switch to a visa that would normally require you to apply from your home country has been extended to 31 July 2020.
            
            
              12 May 2020
              Updated Secure English Language Test (SELT) contact information.
            
            
              7 May 2020
              Updated information about calling the Coronavirus Immigration Help Centre: check call charges with your phone provider if you're calling from abroad.
            
            
              1 May 2020
              Added further guidance for frontline health workers on working in different locations, carrying out supplementary work. The list of frontline workers affected has been expanded to include more occupations.
            
            
              28 April 2020
              Added information on what to do if your 30 day visa to travel to the UK for work, study or to join family has expired or is about to expire.
            
            
              20 April 2020
              Added a link to coronavirus (COVID-19) guidance: Tier 4 sponsors, migrants and short-term students.
            
            
              17 April 2020
              Added link to Tier 2 worker guidance to explain that some NHS workers and their families will get their visas automatically extended because of coronavirus.
            
            
              14 April 2020
              Information added about applicants who can start work or study in the UK before their visa application has been decided.
            
            
              6 April 2020
              Added link to form for visa holders to update their information with the Coronavirus Immigration Team.
            
            
              3 April 2020
              Guidance added for NHS staff, holders of Tier 1 Entrepreneur visas and those applying for a Global Talent, Start-up or Innovator visa.
            
            
              27 March 2020
              UK Visa and Citizenship Application Centres (UKVCAS), Post Office enrolment services and Service and Support Centres (SSCs) are temporarily closed because of coronavirus (COVID-19).
            
            
              25 March 2020
              Updated to add information on the 5 working day response time for helpline emails.
            
            
              24 March 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): immigration and borders
        Visa decision waiting times: applications inside the UK
        Booking and staying in a quarantine hotel if you’ve been in a red list country
        Visa decision waiting times: applications outside the UK
        Coronavirus (COVID-19): student sponsors, migrants and short-term students

  




      

    Collection

  


        Coronavirus (COVID-19): immigration and borders

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Visas and entry clearance
        International travel, immigration and repatriation during coronavirus

  


  

  


    
  


    