Social media companies have a profoundly negative effect on democracies.    Democracies depend on the —the people—accessing, understanding, and using information to make decisions about the society they want to live in. Social media companies become valuable by having users spend a lot of time on their sites; users spend more time on their sites when they are scared, outraged, or constantly seeing content that reinforces their preexisting beliefs—whether it is true or not. The results are predictable. When users see information targeted to them, they view contrary information as lies.To be sure, social media networks do allow marginalised, dispersed individuals to connect with one another and to create virtual communities that are difficult, dangerous, or impossible to create in real life. But on balance, it is hard to argue that social media platforms have furthered the cause of democracy, in democracies or in non-democracies.They aren’t—not even close. Because they have grown so big, it isn’t even clear that they could if they were serious about it. Facebook also harms democracies by allowing extremist content and conspiracy theories to flourish on its site. Look at  – their daily top performing posts. Mark Zuckerberg talks about free speech while creating a powerful vector to allow the spread of hateful, dangerous, and false content available to a third of the world’s population. Facebook was a vital vector for Russia to spread disinformation to interfere in the 2016 presidential election; something like 100 Russian operatives may have reached 150 million Americans with content designed to inflame, distract, and misinform. Other countries are likely to try to do the same in the run-up to this year’s election, but Facebook has not  to prevent it from happening again. One of its actions, the creation of its Oversight Board, won’t occur until after the election. Facebook makes decisions that have deadly consequences; it doesn’t always act like it understands the stakes of bad decisions. When it comes to fixing its many issues, it may be too big to succeed. Other conduits of news, such as newspapers, can be held accountable for publishing false information. Social media networks should be held to a similar standard.  Predictably, social media companies would rather be viewed as  that host information than as publishers—a view that protects them from liability. But the algorithms that social media companies use to serve up content are rulesets that ‘publish’ information to users. Social media is a relatively new technology, and legislators have not yet developed regulations specific to the sector. Instead, social media platforms have been viewed through the lens of Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, passed in 1996, which says an “interactive computer service” can’t be treated as the publisher or speaker of third-party content. This protects websites from lawsuits if a user posts something illegal, although there are exceptions for copyright violations, sex work-related material, and violations of federal criminal law.Of course!  Regulation is why the food you eat and the water you drink are safe; why you can generally trust your local news outlet to give you fact-based information about your community; and why kids don’t see countless advertisements for cigarettes and sugary cereals while they watch Sesame Street.  Right now, users spent nearly 150 minutes  on social networking sites. Social networking is expected to reach about a third of the world’s estimated population. Given the unparalleled reach and influence that these platforms have on our global society, it is unfathomable that they would, could, or should remain completely untouched by regulation or governance.In recent years, Facebook has increasingly been viewed as a monopolist taking improper action to maintain its competitive position and economic power—putting it in a position to be potentially broken up. However, judicial antitrust rulings in recent decades have relied on the consumer welfare standard—are consumers being harmed by higher prices?—to adjudicate antitrust claims. For users, Facebook’s price is zero, complicating this approach. As we’ve seen throughout history, it is possible to create new legislation that is responsive to Big Tech’s unique factors and can protect consumers, promote competition, and prevent companies from becoming too powerful. 