
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Retained General Export Authorisations (GEAs)
  

  
  
  
      
  How retained GEA licences authorise the export of certain controlled items to specified countries.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for International Trade and Export Control Joint Unit

      
      Published
      31 December 2020
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England, Scotland and Wales

                Guidance for Northern Ireland


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Retained GEAs


        
        
          Background

        
        
          How to register for an export licence for controlled items

        
        
          Contact the ECJU


        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
General Export Authorisations (GEAs) are:


  part of the dual-use and the torture goods regulations
  considered equivalent in function to the national system of open general licences (OGLs) issued under UK export control law


GEAs were retained in UK law after the UK’s exit from the EU through the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018. They are now called Retained GEAs.

Retained GEAs are valid for export from England, Scotland, and Wales.

For exports from Northern Ireland, read guidance on:


  EU GEAs for dual-use goods
  torture goods


Retained GEAs


Retained GEAs are are one of several types of licence issued by the Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU), part of the Department for International Trade.

All Retained GEAs continue to operate as UK licences. These are valid only for exports from England, Scotland, and Wales by companies registered in the UK.

As with open general export licences (OGELs), retained GEAs are legal documents.

To legally use the authorisations, UK exporters need to register to use the GEAs with the ECJU and make sure that they meet all the licensing terms and conditions.

As the exporter, it is your responsibility to make sure you are using the correct licence.

Check how to register for an export licence for controlled items.

Retained Dual-Use Regulation

The Retained Dual-Use Regulation controls goods, software or technology that can be used for either civil or military purposes.

Retained Torture Goods Regulation

The Retained Torture Goods Regulation controls goods that can be used for torture or capital punishment.

Read more about export controls: torture and capital punishment goods.

Standard Individual Export Licence (SIELs) and Open Individual Export Licences (OIELs)

You may apply for an SIEL or OIEL if an open licence does not meet your exporting requirements.

To check if you can use an OGL or retained GEA, use the tools on the OGEL and Goods Checker Tools website.

Check how to apply for an SIEL or OIEL.

See also:


  controls on dual-use goods (the retained Dual-Use Regulation)
  controls on torture and capital punishment goods
  UK Strategic Export Control Lists


Background

Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 establishes an EU-wide regime for controlled exports of:


  dual-use items
  software
  technology


This originally included one EU issued licence: the Community General Export Authorisation (CGEA) listed in Annex II of the regulation.

Amending Council Regulation (EU) No 1232/2011

On 8 December 2011, the EU published an amending regulation which introduced:


  an amendment to the existing CGEA

  an additional set of EU GEAs designed to licence certain specified Dual-Use Items for export to named non-EU destinations


This amendment was published as Council Regulation (EU) No 1232/2011. This was retained in UK law following the UK’s exit from the EU.

Retained GEAs in Retained Dual-Use Regulation

There are 6 retained GEAs contained in Annexes to the Retained Dual-Use Regulation:


  
GEA 001 (Annex IIa): exports to Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland (including Liechtenstein) and the United States
  
GEA 002 (Annex IIb): export of certain Dual-Use Items to certain destinations
  
GEA 003 (Annex IIc): export after repair or replacement
  
GEA 004 (Annex IId): temporary export for exhibition or fair
  
GEA 005 (Annex IIe): telecommunications
  
GEA 006 (Annex IIf): chemicals


See the Retained general export authorisations on the open general export licences page.

GEA 001 (Annex 11a) was previously known as the Community General Export Authorisation (CGEA).

There is also one retained GEA in Annex V of the Retained Torture Goods Regulation allowing the export of certain drugs. More information is available on the export controls: torture and capital punishment goods guidance page.

Accessing copies of current OGLs and retained GEA licences

All OGLs published by the ECJU are available on GOV.UK.

To access the retained GEAs, you must download the retained Regulation (EU) No 1232/2011 and either print or view the relevant licence you intend to use.

Scope and conditions of use

Each retained GEA contains a:


  precise list of destinations to which exports are permitted
  specific list of items that may be exported to those destinations
  specific set of conditions of use, which must be adhered to when exporting under the GEA



The items listed on each Dual-Use GEA refer to a control entry heading or rating. This should be cross-referenced to goods described on the Dual-Use List.

How to register for an export licence for controlled items

You can use SPIRE (the online export licensing system) to:


  check whether an Open General Licence (OGL) or a GEA provides coverage for a particular item or destination
  decide if a retained GEA is appropriate for your exports
  check whether an OGL or a GEA provides coverage for a particular item or destination
  register for the appropriate licence



You must:


  
register on SPIRE to use the licence
  meet all the terms and conditions of a retained GEA licence to export under its authority



Declaring/quoting your GEA licence number

You must declare your GEA licence number on the customs declaration form. The relevant numbers must be entered on Box 44 of the form.

Availability

The retained GEAs may be used by any exporter established in the UK (subject to meeting the specified terms and conditions). All GEAs continue to operate as UK licences but will only be valid for exports from the UK.

Previously-issued export licences from an EU27 country

An export licence issued by one of the EU27 countries is no longer valid for export from England, Scotland or Wales.

You must register for the licence in the UK to export dual-use items from the UK.

Previously-issued export licences from the UK

Export licences issued in the UK are no longer valid for exporting dual-use items from EU member states to non-EU countries.

You need a new licence issued by the EU member state to:


  export dual-use items from an EU member state to the UK
  export dual-use items from an EU member state to non-EU countries


The European Council has proposed to add the UK as a permitted destination to Union GEA EU001. This is to minimise any additional licensing burden for exports of dual-use items from the EU to the UK.

Existing licence holders of the Community/Union General Export Authorisation (CGEA)

Existing GEA licence holders:


  may continue to use GEA licences for exports
  do not need to re-register to use the new Retained GEA (EU001)


Compliance and due diligence

Holders of this licence are subject to ECJU Compliance Audits.

You must keep appropriate records when using OGLs (including GEAs).

For more information see the guide on compliance and enforcement of export controls.

All licences are legally binding. It is your responsibility when exporting controlled items that you take all reasonable steps to ensure that you use the correct licence.

You must act to:


  read and understand this guidance
  use the Checker Tools website to help identify an appropriate licence
  seek external legal advice where required


Non-compliance with licence terms and conditions

You must take immediate steps to register or apply for the correct licence if:


  you are mistakenly using the wrong licence
  an ECJU compliance audit confirmed that you were using the wrong licence


Depending on the seriousness and nature of offence, you may receive a warning letter and have your licence either suspended or revoked.

Contact the ECJU



    Helpline

    
      Export Control Joint UnitDepartment for International Trade
Old Admiralty Building
Admiralty PlaceLondonSW1A 2DY
    

    
        
          Email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk
        


        
          Telephone 020 7215 4594
        
    

    Contact for general queries about strategic export licensing.



More information on export controls is available on the ECJU pages of the GOV.UK website and SPIRE the online export licensing database.





      
        
    Published 31 December 2020



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        EU General Export Authorisations (EU GEAs)
        Compliance visits explained
        Exporting in support of UK government defence contracts
        Retained general export authorisation 001: exports to certain countries
        Applying for export licences using SPIRE

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Exporting
        Importing

  


  

  


    
  


    