







Sustainable Development in International Markets
A Metrics-Based Case StudyPublished in: SAGE Business Cases (2020) doi: 10.4135/9781529706796 Posted on RAND.org on January 28, 2020
by Christopher A. Craig, Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers
Related Topics: Environmental Science and Technology, Environmental Sustainability, STEM Education
View related products

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Read More
Access further information on this document at SAGE Publications LtdThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.








Businesses routinely turn to the economic and political characteristics of a country to assess profit potential in emerging international markets. However, other aspects of social and environmental well-being are often overlooked. To address this gap, this research-based case takes a sustainable development approach by exploring social, environmental, and economic characteristics of a top global economy and an emerging economy. The case provides an outline (i.e., questions, metrics, and analysis) that can be used to analyze country-level sustainable development. The interdisciplinary case challenges students to complete an activity to conduct original quantitative research and answer discussion questions about sustainable development.

Access further information on this document at SAGE Publications LtdThis article was published outside of RAND. The full text of the article can be found at the link above.


 Related Products 









Journal Article
The Impact of Climate and Weather on a Small Tourism Business

Jul 3, 2019
Christopher A. Craig, Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers, et al.










Journal Article
A Case Study of Climate Change, Extreme Weather Events, and Risk Communication in a Coastal Community

Jul 3, 2019
Christopher A. Craig, Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers, et al.










Journal Article
Advancing STEM-Based Business Sustainability

Jul 3, 2019
Elizabeth L. Petrun Sayers, Christopher A. Craig, et al.







Research conducted by

RAND Education and Labor



This report is part of the RAND Corporation External publication series. Many RAND studies are published in peer-reviewed scholarly journals, as chapters in commercial books, or as documents published by other organizations.Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/principles.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: Christopher A. Craig and Elizabeth L. Petrun SayersPublisher: SAGE Publications Ltd
Availability: Non-RAND
 Pages: 1
Document Number: EP-68064
Year: 2020
Series: External Publications



Explore
Related Topics

Environmental Science and TechnologyEnvironmental SustainabilitySTEM Education

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




