
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    eAuctions
  

  
  
  
      
  The Crown Commercial Service eAuction programme can help government, public and third sector organisations make savings when buying common goods and services.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Crown Commercial Service

      
      Published
      22 October 2015
      Last updated
      
        8 February 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Reverse eAuctions

        
        
          Forward eAuctions

        
        
          Benefits

        
        
          eAuction programme

        
        
          eAuction process

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview

An electronic auction (eAuction) is a procurement tool that uses web-based software to allow potential suppliers to compete online, in real time, to give prices for the goods or services under auction.

eAuctions can be based on price alone or other criteria such as quality, delivery or service levels can also be taken into account.

Reverse eAuctions

Potential suppliers compete with each other by reducing the price of the goods or services. This is referred to as a ‘reverse’ auction as prices are reduced rather than increased. Prices gradually reduce during the eAuction, as suppliers offer improved pricing to win the contract.

Forward eAuctions

Potential suppliers compete with each other by increasing the price they are willing to pay for the goods or services to win the business being offered. This is referred to as a ‘forward’ auction as prices are increased. Prices gradually increase as suppliers offer improved prices to win the contract. An example of this type of eAuction is suppliers bidding to buy paper and magazines for recycling.

Benefits


  a legally compliant process
  transparency to all parties
  increased savings / revenue potential
  suppliers have multiple opportunities to bid (a traditional tender only provides one opportunity)
  well proven procurement technique using secure internet-based technology
  encourages buyers to clearly specify their requirements so an ‘apples with apples’ comparison can be made


eAuction programme

Our eAuction programme works to maximise commercial advantages and increase the opportunity for savings across many categories of common goods and services.

This helps public sector organisations achieve real savings quickly, whilst protecting quality and service levels.

eAuctions are an ideal procurement route where the aggregation of volume can affect market prices and greatly reduce the purchase price for buyers.

Our programme of eAuctions to conclude the further competitions to call-off our agreements is fully managed by us, with a dedicated and experienced team and expert advice to help you along the way.

eAuction process

We have developed a 7 step process of the steps involved in a typical eAuction project:


  
    
      Step 1
    
  
  
    
      Establish customer requirement
    
  



  
    
      Step 2
    
  
  
    
      Stakeholder engagement to clarify, review and aggregate (if needed) requirements and agree eAuction strategy
    
  



  
    
      Step 3
    
  
  
    
      Invitation to quote (ITQ) and specification is developed, agreed by stakeholders and issued to suppliers
    
  



  
    
      Step 4
    
  
  
    
      Suppliers submit response and opening bids
    
  



  
    
      Step 5
    
  
  
    
      Evaluate quality aspects of responses and invite qualifying suppliers to eAuction
    
  



  
    
      Step 6
    
  
  
    
      The eAuction
    
    
      Suppliers know their ranking but not who they are bidding against. The eAuction typically lasts between 1 and 3 hours but can last longer. After 30 minutes each bid extends the event and the event closes once no bids have been received for 5 minutes. Constantly updated screens show supplier rankings which are automatically recalculated as bids come in
    
  



  
    
      Step 7
    
  
  
    
      Contract with winning supplier
    
  



Take a look at our current aggregation opportunities






      
        
    Published 22 October 2015
    Last updated 8 February 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              8 February 2021
              We changed the aggregation link at the end of the page to the newer aggregation page.
            
            
              21 August 2017
              Removed out of date information and added link to new opportunities page.
            
            
              2 December 2015
              Added eAuction overview brochure
            
            
              22 October 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        CCS overview
        17 customers save over £2.7 million on mobile voice and data services
        Framework for the supply of secure docks to HM Courts & Tribunals Service
        Procurement for prison education dynamic purchasing system

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government spending

  


  

  


    
  


    