
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Energy Innovation
  

  
  
  
      
  Information about the government's energy innovation programmes and how to apply for funding.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      30 October 2016
      Last updated
      
        3 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

        
        
          
BEIS Energy Innovation Programme (funding closed)

        
        
          Mission Innovation

        
        
          Energy Innovation Board

        
        
          Energy Innovation Research

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The BEIS energy innovation funding targets key net-zero innovation opportunities from a whole energy system perspective to accelerate the commercialisation of innovative low-carbon technologies, systems and processes in power, buildings, and industry sectors.

The funding includes:


  the £1 billion Net Zero Innovation Portfolio (2021 to 2025)
  the £505 million BEIS Energy Innovation Programme (2015 to 2021)


Net Zero Innovation Portfolio

The Net Zero Innovation Portfolio provides funding for low-carbon technologies and systems. Decreasing the costs of decarbonisation, the Portfolio will help enable the UK to end its contribution to climate change.

Innovation is key to developing the green technologies needed to tackle climate change. The Net Zero Innovation Portfolio is a £1 billion fund, announced in the Prime Minister’s ten point plan for a green industrial revolution.

Read more about the portfolio and the projects it is funding.


BEIS Energy Innovation Programme (funding closed)

The BEIS Energy Innovation Programme (EIP) aims to accelerate the commercialisation of innovative clean energy technologies and processes into the 2020s and 2030s. The Programme, with a budget of £505 million from 2015-2021 consists of 6 themes, to invest:


  around £70 million in smart systems

  around £90 million in the built environment (energy efficiency & heating)

  around £100 million in industrial decarbonisation and carbon capture, use, and storage (CCUS)

  around £180 million in nuclear innovation

  around £15 million in renewables innovation

  around £50 million in support for energy entrepreneurs and green financing



Support for current EIP projects during coronavirus (COVID-19)

The EIP manages over 250 innovation projects across several energy sectors. The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant disruption to organisations supported through the EIP.

BEIS has set out options it will consider to support existing projects at risk of closing early or substantially reducing in scope due to direct COVID-19 impacts.

For further details regarding the COVID-19 support available for projects please contact your BEIS Project Monitoring Officer, BEIS Project Contract Manager or email EIP_COVID19Contact@beis.gov.uk.

Mission Innovation

In keeping with the Prime Minister’s ten point plan and aims for our COP26 Presidency, the UK continues to cooperate with other countries to accelerate clean energy research, development and demonstration efforts. A primary forum is Mission Innovation, which the UK joined at the COP21 climate change conference in Paris.

Mission Innovation is an international initiative which aims to accelerate clean energy investment and innovation, and currently involves 24 countries and the European Commission (on behalf of the European Union). The UK plays a leading role, formerly chairing the initiative, and currently provides the Head of the Secretariat.

For the first phase of Mission Innovation, all 25 members committed to double their own public investment in clean energy innovation. Since Mission Innovation’s launch, members have delivered a $4.9 billion increase in annual investment in clean energy innovation.

Mission Innovation Ministers have agreed to develop a second phase to be announced at the Sixth Mission Innovation Ministerial in June 2021 that includes:


  an enhanced Innovation Platform building on current activities to strengthen the global clean energy innovation ecosystem and to accelerate learning
  new public-private innovation alliances – Missions – built around ambitious and inspirational goals backed by voluntary commitments that can lead to tipping points in the cost, scale, availability, and attractiveness of clean energy solutions


The development of an ambitious second phase is a priority for our COP26 Presidency to increase global cooperation and accelerate the pace of innovation of clean energy solutions so that every country and sector can affordably meet net zero by 2050 or before.

Energy Innovation Board

The Energy Innovation Board has been formed to replace and build on the work of the LCICG, to provide an even greater opportunity to collaborate at a strategic level.

This new Board is chaired by Sir Patrick Vallance, the Government Chief Scientific Advisor, and attended by senior civil servants across BEIS, Innovate UK, Research Councils, UKRI, DCLG, Research Councils, Defra, DfID, DfT, Ofgem, and with HMT and the Devolved Administrations as observers.

Energy Innovation Research

BEIS funded technical research, covering aspects of low carbon heating technologies, are going to be essential to meeting the UK’s legally binding climate change commitments.


  Heat pump research






      
        
    Published 30 October 2016
    Last updated 3 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 March 2021
              The BEIS Energy Innovation Programme is now closed for funding. The government has announced a new £1 billion Net Zero Innovation Portfolio which provides funding for low-carbon technologies and systems.
            
            
              7 July 2020
              Details added on how to get support for current EIP projects during the coronavirus pandemic.
            
            
              12 October 2017
              Updates announced in Clean Growth Strategy.
            
            
              18 September 2017
              Link to new Green finance page added
            
            
              21 April 2017
              Funding for innovative built environment.
            
            
              25 January 2017
              Text updated to reflect current coverage of spend on energy innovation
            
            
              11 November 2016
              Information about the Energy Innovation Board added
            
            
              30 October 2016
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Clean Growth Fund
        Funding for innovative smart energy systems
        Funding for innovation in renewable energy
        Heat technical research
        Innovations in the built environment

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Funding programmes

  


  

  


    
  


    