

The prospect of using geoengineering to address the accelerating effects of climate change is becoming more likely, and many of the potential technologies have negative externalities on the global to regional scale. In this Perspective, the authors review the state of different geoengineering technologies, the geopolitical risks associated with geoengineering implementation, and international governance options.




Read Online

Climate Control
International Legal Mechanisms for Managing the Geopolitical Risks of Geoengineering
by Michelle Grisé, Emmi Yonekura, Jonathan S. Blake, David DeSmet, Anusree Garg, Benjamin Lee Preston
Related Topics: Environmental Legislation, Environmental Regulation, Environmental Science and Technology, Global Climate Change, Global Security, International Diplomacy, International Law
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


0.9 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










The prospect of using geoengineering to address the accelerating effects of climate change is becoming more likely, and many of the potential technologies have negative externalities on the global to regional scale. In this Perspective, the authors review the state of different geoengineering technologies, highlighting differences in technological development stage, price, time scales, and potential secondary effects. They discuss the geopolitical risks that may be introduced by geoengineering implementation. Given the many serious risks that geoengineering poses, they conclude by examining whether existing international governance mechanisms manage the geopolitical risks associated with geoengineering.
This Perspective draws on a review of the relevant technical, international relations, and international law literature, as well as a scenario-development workshop in which 24 academic research experts on climate policy, international relations, and international law considered the geopolitical risks of geoengineering and the role of international legal mechanisms in the management of these geopolitical risks. The workshop was conducted virtually in two three-hour sessions over two days. This Perspective and the recommendations contained herein should be of interest to decisionmakers and policymakers in the area of climate risk management.

Research conducted by

RAND International



Funding for this project was provided by the generous contributions of the RAND Center for Global Risk and Security (CGRS) Advisory Board. This work was conducted within the RAND Center for Global Risk and Security.This publication is part of the RAND Corporation Perspective series. RAND Perspectives present expert insights on timely policy issues. All RAND Perspectives undergo peer review to ensure high standards for quality and objectivity.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 26
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/PE-A1133-1
Document Number: PE-A1133-1
Year: 2021
Series: Perspectives



Explore
Related Topics

Environmental LegislationEnvironmental RegulationEnvironmental Science and TechnologyGlobal Climate ChangeGlobal SecurityInternational DiplomacyInternational Law

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Grisé, Michelle, Emmi Yonekura, Jonathan S. Blake, David DeSmet, Anusree Garg, and Benjamin Lee Preston, Climate Control: International Legal Mechanisms for Managing the Geopolitical Risks of Geoengineering. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2021. https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA1133-1.html.
Grisé, Michelle, Emmi Yonekura, Jonathan S. Blake, David DeSmet, Anusree Garg, and Benjamin Lee Preston, Climate Control: International Legal Mechanisms for Managing the Geopolitical Risks of Geoengineering, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, PE-A1133-1, 2021. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA1133-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



