
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Protocol for Home Office registered forensic pathologists
  

  
  

  
    
  The document sets out the expectations that the Pathology Delivery Board has of register members in relation to the Criminal Justice System.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Home Office

      
      Published
      26 September 2012
      Last updated
      
        7 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Protocol for membership of the Home Office Register of Forensic Pathologists
    
        PDF, 160KB, 17 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email alternativeformats@homeoffice.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    Protocol for membership of the Home Office Register of Forensic Pathologists (accessible version)
    
        HTML
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
The purpose of this document is to set out the expectations that the Pathology Delivery Board has of members of the Register in their dealings with the Criminal Justice System including issues such as workload, effective service and continuous professional development.



        
      

      
    Published 26 September 2012
    Last updated 7 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 April 2021
              Updated the Protocol for membership of the Home Office Register of Forensic Pathologists.

Created accessible HTML version of the document.
            
            
              26 September 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Equal Rights Coalition founding principles
        Forensic pathology: audit report 3
        Equal Rights Coalition
        LGBTI human rights in Chechnya: Equal Rights Coalition statement
        Coronavirus and the human rights of LGBTI people: Equal Rights Coalition statement

  


  










  
    
        
  
    

  


    
  


    