
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Pay no import duty and VAT when importing decorations and awards
  

  
  
  
      
  You can claim a relief to pay no Customs Duty and VAT if you are importing or presenting a decoration or award in the UK.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Revenue & Customs

      
      Published
      31 July 2020
      Last updated
      
        31 December 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who can claim relief

        
        
          What you can claim relief on

        
        
          Goods you cannot claim relief on

        
        
          Before you claim

        
        
          When to claim

        
        
          How to claim

        
        
          After you’ve claimed

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Who can claim relief

You can get relief if you:


  have been given a decoration or award in a country outside the UK
  are a person who will be giving a decoration or award to persons in the UK


The recipient of the decoration or award must be either a:


  non-UK resident being given the award at business conference or international event taking place in the UK
  UK resident


What you can claim relief on

The goods must be given by:


  governments
  heads of state of countries other than the UK
  organisations giving honorary awards in the field of:
    
      sport
      arts
      science
      public service
    
  


You can get relief on:


  awards
  cups
  medals
  trophies
  other items of a symbolic nature


The goods must not have any commercial intent.

Goods you cannot claim relief on

You cannot get relief for long service awards, prizes or gifts.

You also cannot claim for:


  watches
  cars
  promotional items
  any consumables such as:
    
      alcoholic drinks
      tobacco products
      foods
    
  


Before you claim

You should check if your goods are strictly controlled and if you will need an import licence.

When you get the commodity code for your goods using the tariff it will tell you if you need a license.

When to claim

You should claim relief at the time of import. if you do not do this, we may accept a late claim and repay the appropriate charges subject to conditions.

How to claim

We need to see a certificate or press publicity material relating to the decoration or award. We will also accept a letter or statement from the donor or organiser of the event.

We may contact the donors or organisers to check the evidence given is genuine and legitimate.

Goods imported in baggage

If your goods are imported in baggage you must declare them to us when you arrive. You can do this in either the:


  Customs Red Channel
  Red Point


You’ll need to have the necessary supporting documentation or evidence to show you’re entitled to this relief.

We may also ask you to make a declaration on the imported decorations and awards (C920) form.

Find out how accessible our forms are.

Goods imported as freight

Enter one of the following codes in box 37 of the declaration:


  40 00 C27 for goods imported from outside the UK on which you claim relief from duty and VAT
  49 00 C27 for goods imported from the Channel Islands on which you claim relief from VAT


Goods imported by post

Ask the sender to write ‘Decoration or award – relief claimed’ clearly on the package and its accompanying customs declaration (CN22 or CN23).

Find out more information about importing goods by post.

Getting someone else to complete your customs declaration

You can use someone else to complete entries on your behalf but you must make sure you give clear written instructions for the goods that you’re claiming relief on.

After you’ve claimed

If you dispose of your goods

You must tell the National Imports Reliefs Unit if you dispose or transfer your goods to another person.

Records you must keep

You must keep:


  any National Imports Relief Unit acknowledgement letters
  receipts
  bills
  invoices
  insurance documents


You need to keep additional records if:


  you transfer goods to another approved entity – keep any official documentation detailing transfer between you and other entity
  you re-export the goods – keep the NES declaration details or export documentation providing information about the date of export
  your goods are stolen, lost or destroyed – keep police or insurance incident reports, or official documentation providing details of the date of the incident or loss


You must keep all records for a minimum of 4 years.

If you break the conditions of the relief

If you no longer meet the conditions of the relief, you must immediately notify the National Import Reliefs Unit orally, electronically, or in writing.

Provide full details of the importation and why you think the conditions of the relief have been breached.

If you want to appeal

Appeal if you disagree a decision made by HMRC.





      
        
    Published 31 July 2020
    Last updated 31 December 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              31 December 2020
              This page has been updated because the Brexit transition period has ended.
            
            
              31 July 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Import, export and customs for businesses
        VAT

  


  

  


    
  


    