





Read Online

The Unforeseen Consequences of Artificial Intelligence (AI) on Society
A Systematic Review of Regulatory Gaps Generated by AI in the U.S.
by Carlos Ignacio Gutierrez Gaviria
Related Topics: Artificial Intelligence, Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy
CitationEmbed

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn






Download eBook for Free

FormatFile SizeNotes




PDF file


2.3 MB
Use Adobe Acrobat Reader version 10 or higher for the best experience.










As a formal discipline, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is over 60 years old. In this time, breakthroughs in the field have generated technologies that compare to or outperform humans in tasks requiring creativity and complex reasoning. AI's growing catalog of applications and methods has the potential to profoundly affect public policy by generating instances where regulations are not adequate to confront the issues faced by society, also known as regulatory gaps.
The objective of this dissertation is to improve our understanding of how AI influences U.S. public policy. It systematically explores, for the first time, the role of AI in the generation of regulatory gaps. Specifically, it addresses two research questions:

What U.S. regulatory gaps exist due to AI methods and applications?
When looking across all of the gaps identified in the first research question, what trends and insights emerge that can help stakeholders plan for the future?

These questions are answered through a systematic review of four academic databases of literature in the hard and social sciences. Its implementation was guided by a protocol that initially identified 5,240 candidate articles. A screening process reduced this sample to 241 articles (published between 1976 and February of 2018) relevant to answering the research questions.
This dissertation contributes to the literature by adapting the work of Bennett-Moses and Calo to effectively characterize regulatory gaps caused by AI in the U.S. In addition, it finds that most gaps: do not require new regulation or the creation of governance frameworks for their resolution, are found at the federal and state levels of government, and AI applications are recognized more often than methods as their cause.

Table of Contents

Chapter One
Regulatory Gaps

Chapter Two
Background on Artificial Intelligence

Chapter Three
Protocol for the Systematic Review

Chapter Four
Cases of Regulatory Gaps Identified in the Systematic Review

Chapter Five
Overview of the Systematic Review

Chapter Six
Case Studies on Under-Represented Issues in the Systematic Review

Chapter Seven
Conclusion

Appendix A
Detailed Table of Contents

Appendix B
Defining Technology

Appendix C
Selected Historical Precedents for AI

Appendix D
PRISMA Checklist

Appendix E
Screening of Articles

Appendix F
Systematic Review Articles

Appendix G
Definitions of Autonomous Weapon Systems

Appendix G
Standards for Meaningful Human Control




Research conducted by

Pardee RAND Graduate School



This document was submitted as a dissertation in January 2020 in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the doctoral degree in public policy analysis at the Pardee RAND Graduate School. The faculty committee that supervised and approved the dissertation consisted of Dave Baiocchi (Chair), Nidhi Kalra, John Seely Brown, and William Welser IV. This work was funded by the Government of Mexico, the Horowitz Foundation for Social Policy, and by the Pardee RAND Graduate School through its Redesign Dissertation Award.This report is part of the RAND Corporation Dissertation series. Pardee RAND dissertations are produced by graduate fellows of the Pardee RAND Graduate School, the world's leading producer of Ph.D.'s in policy analysis. The dissertations are supervised, reviewed, and approved by a Pardee RAND faculty committee overseeing each dissertation.Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.




Document Details

Copyright: AuthorPublisher: RAND Corporation
Availability: Web-Only
 Pages: 215
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7249/RGSDA319-1
Document Number: RGSD-A319-1
Year: 2020
Series: Dissertations



Explore
Related Topics

Artificial IntelligenceScience, Technology, and Innovation Policy

Browse by Series
Browse by Authors


Stay InformedRAND Policy CurrentsGet weekly updates from RAND.
EmailSign Up




Citation
Format:

 Chicago Manual of Style
 RAND Corporation Style Manual

Gutierrez Gaviria, Carlos Ignacio, The Unforeseen Consequences of Artificial Intelligence (AI) on Society: A Systematic Review of Regulatory Gaps Generated by AI in the U.S.. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSDA319-1.html.
Gutierrez Gaviria, Carlos Ignacio, The Unforeseen Consequences of Artificial Intelligence (AI) on Society: A Systematic Review of Regulatory Gaps Generated by AI in the U.S., Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RGSD-A319-1, 2020. As of December 15, 2021: https://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSDA319-1.html

Download Citation (BibTeX)
Download Citation (RIS)



