
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    College collaboration fund (CCF)
  

  
  
  
      
  A peer-support programme to help FE colleges share good practice and develop quality improvement priorities.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Education

      
      Published
      27 February 2020
      Last updated
      
        5 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Round 2 successful applicants

        
        
          Overview

        
        
          Aims of the programme

        
        
          Timescales

        
        
          Eligibility

        
        
          Quality improvement themes

        
        
          Responsibilities

        
        
          Support from third parties

        
        
          Funding

        
        
          Reporting

        
        
          Evaluation

        
        
          Payment and repayment of funding

        
        
          Contact

        
        
          Annex A: specific quality improvement needs

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Applications for the second round of the CCF closed on 21 May 2021.


You can view the project summaries and resources developed by successful applicants at College Collaboration Fund (CCF) projects. Insights and learning from the fund are available at College Collaboration Fund insight report.

Round 2 successful applicants


  
    
      Lead college
      Partner college or colleges
    
  
  
    
      Activate Learning (Oxford, Berkshire and   Surrey)
      Bournemouth  and Poole College, Newbury College
    
    
      Bridgwater and Taunton College
      Wiltshire College and   University Centre
    
    
      Cirencester College
      Strode College, Brockenhurst College, The Henley College, Petroc, St Brendon’s Sixth Form, Shrewsbury Colleges Group
    
    
      EKC Group
      North Kent College, Morley College (London )
    
    
      Harrow College and   Uxbridge College
      Ealing, Hammersmith and West London College           West Thames College, Barnet and Southgate College, Stanmore College
    
    
      Hartlepool College of Further Education
      East Durham College, Bishop Auckland College, NCG
    
    
      Heart of Worcestershire   College
      TEC Partnership (Grimsby, Hull and Scarborough)
    
    
      Lincoln College
      Chesterfield College
    
    
      London South East Colleges
      East Sussex College Group, East Surrey College
    
    
      LTE Group
      Bury College, Bolton College, Hopwood Hall College, Oldham College, Tameside College, Trafford College,  Wigan and Leigh College, Salford City College
    
    
      Middlesbrough College
      Darlington College, Hartlepool College, Education Training Collective, Northern School of Art
    
    
      New College Durham
      Gateshead College, Trafford College
    
    
      Runshaw College
      Bury College, Tameside College
    
    
      South and City College   Birmingham
      Solihull College and University Centre, City of Wolverhampton College, Coventry College
    
    
      South Thames College Group
      Sparsholt College, Basingstoke College
    
    
      Tyne Coast College
      Itchen College, Selby College
    
    
      Weston College of Further Education
      City College Plymouth, National College for Advanced Transport and Infrastructure (NCATI)
    
    
      Wilberforce College
      Franklin College, John Leggott Sixth Form
    
  


Overview

The College Collaboration Fund (CCF) is a national programme of competitive grant funding for all statutory further education (FE) providers.

CCF enables colleges to collaborate and share good practice and expertise to address common quality improvement priorities. The fund builds on the previous CCF round in 2020 to 2021 and its predecessor, the Strategic College Improvement Fund (SCIF).

Aims of the programme

CCF aims to:


  develop greater collaboration between FE colleges
  stimulate quality improvement through developing sector-led approaches to peer-to-peer support and sharing good practice
  ensure sustainability of FE provision through adopting processes that support high performance
  produce resources and approaches for quality improvement that can be adopted by other FE providers
  stimulate the market and provider base to support ongoing quality improvement
  
    develop a stronger FE offer by improving the quality of FE provision and learner outcomes
  
  better meet local and national skills priorities and improve labour market outcomes for learners


Timescales

CCF will run for the financial year 2021 to 2022 and there is one application round. You must complete all grant-funded activity by 31 March 2022. If you are successful, you will receive your grant on or around 18 August 2021.

You can begin delivery of CCF grant-funded activity from when you are first notified that you have been successful but this will be at your own risk.

Eligibility

Institution type

Only statutory FE providers can apply as defined in section 91 of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992.

These are:


  general FE colleges
  sixth-form colleges (except those in the process of converting to an academy in the 2021 to 2022 financial year)
  designated institutions


You cannot apply if you’re a school or academy, local authority, independent learning provider, special post-16 institution, non-maintained special school.

Deputies or advisers who work as a contractor for the FE Commissioner are not eligible to receive CCF funds.

Number of colleges

Each application will need a lead applicant college and a minimum of one other improvement partner college.

You will need to select the colleges you want to work with before you apply.

You cannot apply as an individual college if you operate as part of college group structure (any application must be in the name of your college group).

Ofsted grade

To lead a bid, you must have either Ofsted grade 1 (outstanding) or grade 2 (good) for overall effectiveness.

Colleges who have recently merged or are planning conversion

You can still apply if you do not have an Ofsted rating because you are a college that’s recently merged. In this case, if one of the 2 previous colleges meets the criteria, you can still apply.

Sixth-form colleges that are currently in the process or planning conversion to an academy in the 2021 to 2022 financial year are excluded and are not eligible to apply.

Previous CCF and SCIF applicants

You can still apply if you have previously received CCF or SCIF funding.

Quality improvement themes

Your programme of work must address at least one of the fund’s 3 quality improvement themes identified by DfE. These are listed below:

A: Quality of education

Programmes of work may focus on delivering improvements and effectiveness of:


  increasing progression to level 3 and beyond (including both technical and higher technical)
  student engagement and experience
  teaching, learning and assessment
  workforce development
  apprenticeships
  maths and English
  high needs provision
  safeguarding
  specific vocational areas


B: Financial and resource management

Programmes of work may focus on delivering improvements and effectiveness of:


  costed curriculum planning
  financial management controls and processes
  recruitment and value for money
  estates optimisation
  workforce planning
  efficient curriculum delivery
  risk management


C: Leadership and governance

Programmes of work may focus on delivering improvements and effectiveness of:


  business strategy development
  use of management information and data
  mentoring and coaching
  recruitment, development and retention pathway for potential new leaders
  understanding and responding to local and national skills priorities


In your application you are not restricted to a predetermined list of activities.

We are particularly interested in receiving applications that address the following specific quality improvement needs:


  development of digital content and resources to support remote and blended delivery
  supporting learner resilience, wellbeing and mental health to enable learners to stay engaged in their education
  developing support for learners to address lost learning and enable catch up


Further information on these specific quality improvement needs can be found in annex A.

Responsibilities

The lead applicant college will be responsible for:


  submitting the application
  managing the funding allocated
  accounting for progress on the programme of work
  submitting monitoring and self-evaluation reports
  completing a case study
  contributing to DfE dissemination activity to promote learning


The lead applicant college and improvement partner college or colleges must work together to:


  understand the challenges you face
  develop a costed programme of work
  plan how you’ll use your combined experience and knowledge
  deliver the programme of work
  complete an end of programme evaluation
  contribute to DfE material to support the promotion of learning


Support from third parties

You can get support from a third party, for example:


  college outside your group submitting the application
  school outside your group submitting the application
  not-for-profit or private provider


If you get support, you will need to:


  get agreement from all the improvement partner colleges in your group
  provide the names of any third parties you will use on your application
  provide evidence about the capacity and capability of any third parties you will use
  complete any due diligence processes that you feel is relevant or proportionate for subcontracting


Funding

You can apply for up to £500,000. The expected minimum application is for £100,000. The total fund is £5.4 million.

College match funding contribution

Your group is expected to contribute total match funding equal to a minimum of 25% of the total cost of your programme of work. For example, if the total cost of your programme of work is £400,000, we would expect to see a matched funding contribution of £100,000. The proportion of match funding contribution made by each individual college improvement partner involved in your application is to be determined by your group.

The total cost of your programme of work must include your match funding.

DfE may waive a proportionate amount of match funding contribution where a college is in formal intervention with the Education and Skills Funding Agency (ESFA) and:


  asking for a contribution would undermine a college’s financial viability
  where value for money can still be obtained


Any other college in the group that does not meet these criteria will still need to contribute their proportion of match funding.

Decisions:


  will be based on ESFA’s most recent assessment of a college’s financial health
  are at DfE’s sole discretion


Match funding eligibility

Your matched funding must meet any true additional costs, for example, third party fees or additional time-limited internal staffing.

In-kind costs are not eligible as match funding, for example, salary payments for staff redeployed to the programme of works.

Your matched funding can include temporary costs, for example, replacing staff who are working on the program of works.

VAT

Total eligible programme costs may include irrecoverable VAT, but you will not be able to claim for additional funding above the amount you have been awarded to cover any additional VAT liability.

Conditions of funding

Your application must:


  target your proposed programme of work and activities at addressing specific quality improvement needs shared by your group
  demonstrate how you have used evidence to identify the specific quality improvement needs
  identify the products, learning and good practice that will be derived from your programme of work and how this will be shared with the wider FE sector


What’s excluded from CCF funding

You cannot use CCF funding for capital expenditures on assets valued cumulatively over £2,500. Capital assets are those which are expected to be used for a period of at least 12 months such as:


  buildings
  furniture
  fittings
  information technology
  software


Also excluded are any:


  staff restructuring
  independent business reviews
  marketing or public relations activities
  activities that are predominantly focused on a college’s higher education provision
  activities or services you would normally get free of charge
  payments you will make for subsidised activities or services at a higher ‘market’ rate


There is no limit on the amount of spend on capital items using partner college match funding contributions.

Reporting

During your programme of work, you will need to:


  provide ESFA with a monitoring return on your use of grant funds at each quarter and the endpoint of your programme of work
  identify risks and issues that are or could have an impact on your programme of work
  account for progress against the agreed work programme by identifying key performance indicators, milestones and measures of success at the beginning of the programme
  produce and keep a spending profile - there needs to be clarity within your internal accounting systems to provide assurance on the use of funds


When your programme of work is completed, you’ll need to provide:


  
ESFA with an end of project monitoring return on your use of grant funds
  
    a summary of your programme of work’s achievements
  
  confirmation of your final spending position, including accounting officer sign off


All timescales for submitting completed monitoring forms will be confirmed in your grant award letter.

Evaluation

You will be required to complete a DfE evaluation form to evaluate and measure your programme of work. DfE may generate data based on this evaluation which may be published in an anonymised way so that individuals and colleges cannot be identified.

For further guidance on approach to CCF project evaluation, see Self-evaluation plan guidance (PDF, 266KB, 20 pages)

Payment and repayment of funding

The lead applicant college will receive payment from ESFA under a funding schedule.

ESFA will enter into a contract with the lead applicant college. Any arrangements between the college improvement partners involved in your application are to be determined by your group.

CCF funding will become repayable through a future reduction in ESFA funding if:


  
CCF funding is not spent by 31 March 2022
  
CCF funding is not spent on the eligible activities you have detailed in your programme of work (unless any change has been agreed with the ESFA)
  reports on expenditures and outcomes are not submitted


Contact

If you have any questions about the programme or developing an application, email college.collaborationfund@education.gov.uk.

Annex A: specific quality improvement needs



Development of digital content and resources to support remote and blended delivery

Objective

To develop high-quality digital content and resources to support the delivery of the FE curriculum.

Overview

The FE sector has made strides in remote and blended delivery in response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. However, the Colleges and COVID-19 - summer survey 2020 conducted by the Association of Colleges found many colleges reported challenges in accessing high-quality engaging digital content and resources for some areas of the FE curriculum.

The project will bring together a group of FE colleges with proven subject and remote and blended learning expertise to develop high-quality digital content and resources for use across the FE sector.

Proposals should take account of areas of the FE curriculum where there are insufficient digital content and resources, and should not duplicate digital content and resources recently funded by DfE including:


  digital curriculum content produced through the first round of CCF set out in Digital resources mapping (MS Excel Spreadsheet, 20.1KB) and accessible on the Remote Education Service

  digital resources for 5 FE subject areas available through Jisc

  specialist and English and maths resources provided by the digital lessons and resources relating to Oak National Academy



Outputs

Outputs would cover quality digital content and resources for a subject area or areas for national publication and use by all FE teaching staff.



Supporting learner resilience, wellbeing and mental health to enable learners to stay engaged in their education

Objective

To develop initiatives that will ensure learners stay engaged in their learning and are supported to maintain good wellbeing and mental health.

Overview

The project will bring together a group of colleges with proven expertise in providing support to learners, including around wellbeing and mental health, to maintain engagement in learning. This could include developing:


  innovative approaches to supporting learner mental health or engaging with external providers
  producing good practice guides or new content for colleges in supporting learner wellbeing and mental health
  initiatives to develop learner confidence and resilience or provide preventative support
  anti-bullying interventions for learners who have been the victim of bullying, especially for high-risk groups such as LGBT+ and SEND



Learner focused proposals would be encouraged, with colleges developing projects that empower learners to take responsibility for their own mental health and wellbeing.

Outputs

Outputs might cover:


  reduction in drop out and young people becoming NEET

  increase in learners reporting improved mental health and wellbeing
  production of resources to support learner mental health and wellbeing
  improved workforce training in learner mental health, wellbeing and responding to bullying




Developing support for learners to address lost learning and enable catch up

Objective

To develop practical solutions that can support 16 to 19 year old learners to address catch up where necessary, build learner resilience and mitigate against further learning loss.

Overview

The project will bring together a group of colleges and other relevant partners with the aim of developing approaches for catch up support and mitigation against further learning loss.

The project will focus on:


  identifying and drawing on best practice activity to help keep learners engaged in their learning
  develop new support and build on existing practice that will help a learner minimise the impact of further learning loss
  develop solutions that can support learners to catch up on any time which has been lost from their learning


Proposals should:


  be learner focused, practical to the learner and provide a tangible and measurable benefit
  strengthen learner awareness of the personal impact of lost learning and promote a recognition of the need for and the benefits of catch up activity
  encourage learners to take ownership of their learning, develop individual ambition to remain engaged and promote a renewed personal focus on their learning


Outputs

Outputs might cover:


  reduction in learner drop out
  evidence that catch up is over and above the planned curriculum and provider driven modes of learning during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and beyond
  production of an online toolkit of successful catch up methods and strategies that can be shared across the sector






      
        
    Published 27 February 2020
    Last updated 5 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              5 November 2021
              Added link to College Collaboration Fund (CCF) insight report.
            
            
              22 October 2021
              Removed Haringey Sixth Form as a partner college for South Thames College Group.
            
            
              22 September 2021
              Page lists successful applicants in round 2 of the College Collaboration Fund (CCF).
            
            
              23 July 2021
              Added list of successful applicants.
            
            
              21 May 2021
              Removed application information.
            
            
              19 April 2021
              Added information and documents for the 2021 to 2022 application round.
            
            
              6 April 2021
              Added information about the 2020 to 2021 application round. Removed previous information about the 2019 to 2020 programme round.
            
            
              23 July 2020
              Added a list of colleges who will receive grant funding.
            
            
              29 June 2020
              Removed details on how to apply - the application period has now closed.
            
            
              10 June 2020
              Reopened the application round and updated the application form and guidance.
            
            
              30 March 2020
              Added information about the changed application deadline.
            
            
              6 March 2020
              Updated application form and criteria.
            
            
              3 March 2020
              Added webinar details to 'Support for applicants'.
            
            
              27 February 2020
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        College collaboration fund (CCF) projects
        College Collaboration Fund (CCF) insight report
        Report of the independent review of college financial oversight
        Coronavirus (COVID-19): initial teacher training (ITT)
        Local authority children’s services: coronavirus (COVID-19)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Further education funding

  


  

  


    
  


    