
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Fishing certification and training
  

  
  
  
      
  How to get statutory safety training and the certificates of competency you will need to work in the fishing industry.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Maritime and Coastguard Agency

      
      Published
      19 September 2012
      Last updated
      
        20 April 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Safety training for boat workers and Certificates of Competence

        
        
          Certificates of Competency (CoC)

        
        
          Fishing training providers

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
It’s important that all fishermen understand the risks involved in fishing at sea and know what to do in an emergency.

Before you go to sea as a fisherman you must take formal safety training and have certificates to prove that you have done the training.

In this guide you will find information on safety training for fishermen, crew agreements, the different Certificates of Competence (CoC) and details about providers of fishing industry training.

Safety training for boat workers and Certificates of Competence

If you’re new to the fishing industry you must attend the following safety training courses:


  Basic sea survival
  Basic fire fighting and prevention
  Basic first aid
  Basic health and safety


All new entrants must do the Basic Sea Survival course before going to sea for the first time. The other 3 basic safety training courses must be done within 3 months of starting work as a fisherman.

If you have 2 years fishing experience you must attend the Safety Awareness and Risk Assessment course. You can find training and certification requirements for fishing vessel crew in MGN 411 Certification requirements for crew of fishing vessels, small commercial vessels and large yachts. This also gives more detail about the certification requirements for fishing vessels that are 16.5 metres and above in length.

Arrangements for first aid and medical care training for fishing vessel personnel, boatmaster’s licence holders or operators under statutory codes of practice can be found in MGN 147 (M+F) Training in First Aid and Medical Care.

Certificates of Competency (CoC)

The rules governing the Certificates of Competency (CoC) are based on the size or power of a fishing vessel, as well as its area of operation.

If you are a skipper, mate or engineer, working on fishing vessels that are 16.5 metres in length and above, or work on vessels with propulsive powers of 750 kilowatts, you must hold an MCA CoC.

You can only get a CoC after assessment and examination, which consists of practical, written and oral components. Guidance and application information for gaining a Fishing Certificate of Competency for deck and engineer officers, including conversions and upgrades is available on the MCA website.

Read more about the general requirements for certification and medical fitness for Certificates of Competency in MSN 1883 and MSN 1886 (M+F).

Certificates of Competency for personnel on fishing vessels

There are three specific CoCs for deck personnel on fishing vessels:


  Deck Officer (Fishing Vessel) Class 1
  Deck Officer (Fishing Vessel) Class 2
  Deck Officer (Fishing Vessel) Class 3


The CoC does not cover work on standby, seismic survey and oceanographic research vessels. Suitably qualified fishing CoC holders can apply for a restricted CoC for these types of vessel. More information can be found in MGN 121 (M)  Use of Fishing Vessel Certificates of Competency in Standby, Seismic Survey and Oceanographic Research Vessels - Revised Arrangements..

There are two specific CoCs for engineering personnel on fishing vessels:


  Engineer Officer (Fishing Vessel) Class 1
  Engineer Officer (Fishing Vessel) Class 2


You can find information and syllabuses for engineering fishing officers to apply for certification on the MCA website.

MGN 411 (M+F) provides further guidance on the Deck and Engineer Officer requirements for fishing vessels, and on a general exemption regarding the carriage of engineer officers on vessels with a propulsive power of more than 750 kilowatts operating in the limited area. You can find out more in MGN 411 (M+F) Training and Certification Requirements for the Crew of Fishing Vessels and their Applicability to Small Commercial Vessels and Large Yachts.

How to apply for a Fishing Certificate of Competency

Seafarers can only serve on a fishing vessel if they hold a CoC or a Certificate of Equivalent Competency (CEC). Guidance and application information for gaining a Fishing Certificate of Competency for deck and engineer officers, including conversions and upgrades can be found here..

Information on how to apply for a UK fishing Certificate of Competence (CoC) for engineers can be found here.

All UK fishing vessels must have a list of crew on board which must be left with the nominated person before or immediately after the departure of the vessel. 
MSN 1891 Amendment 1 ILO work in fishing convention list of crew provides more guidance.

Fishing training providers

You can access training necessary for the fishing industry via a Seafish-approved and supported network of training providers. These providers exist throughout the UK and deliver training courses such as:


  Basic Sea Survival
  Basic Fire Fighting & Prevention
  Basic First Aid
  Basic Health & Safety
  Safety Awareness
  Basic Stability Awareness
  Intermediate Stability Awareness
  Damage Control
  Bridge Watchkeeping - two day and five day courses
  Engine Room Watchkeeping - two day and five day courses
  Diesel Engine Course
  Care of the Catch
  Food Safety and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points training for fishers
  Sea Fishing Apprenticeship
  Basic Seamanship


You can find Seafish-approved training providers on the Seafish website..

Nautical colleges and training providers

Nautical colleges run courses leading to a UK Certificate of Competency for the merchant navy. You can find contact details for nautical colleges and training providers on the MCA website.

There are various organisations that can provide further information on nautical training, for example:


  The Association of Marine Electronics and Radio Colleges (AMERC) is a network 
      of colleges, universities and private organisations providing courses and consultancies in marine radio and 
      electronics.
  
Edexcel is an awarding 
      body offering academic and vocational qualifications
  The International Association of Marine Institutions (IAMI) is an association of colleges and 
      organisations involved in providing education and training for personnel in the merchant navy, towing and 
      fishing industries.
  The Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology (IMarEST) is the an 
      international membership body and learned society for marine professionals.
  The Merchant Navy Training Board (MNTB) is the shipping industry’s central body for 
       promoting and developing seafarer education, training and skills.
  The National Recognition Information Centre for the United Kingdom (UK NARIC)
       is the national agency which provides information and advice about vocational, academic and professional 
       skills and qualifications.
  The Royal Institute of Naval Architecture (RINA) is an internationally renowned 
      professional institution involved in design, construction, maintenance and operation of marine vessels and 
      structures.
  The Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA) is the national 
      accreditation and awarding body in Scotland.
  The Ship Safe Training Group (SSTG) provide a recruitment and training service for 
      over 30 member shipping companies.
  
Seafish is a cross-industry seafood body working with fishers, processors, 
      wholesalers, seafood farmers, fish friers, caterers, retailers and the import/export trade. Seafish carries out 
      training courses for fishers.


Further information

MCA Training and Certification Helpline: 023 8032 9231





      
        
    Published 19 September 2012
    Last updated 20 April 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              20 April 2021
              Fishing Vessel Training and Certification has been edited to reflect new important information and website links.
            
            
              9 August 2019
              Refined the Nautical College and Training Providers list to be more appropriate to the Fishing Industry.
            
            
              1 August 2019
              Added reference to Class 3 Fishing CoC.
            
            
              4 December 2018
              Updated link to Seafish website
            
            
              19 September 2012
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        MGN 411 Certification requirements for crew of fishing vessels, small commercial vessels and large yachts
        How to apply for a UK CoC: fishing vessel officers
        How to apply for UK engineering fishing CoCs
        MSA engineer officer (fishing) requirements and syllabuses
        How to apply for a fishing certificate of competency

  




      

    Collection

  


        Safety of fishing vessels and crew

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Funding
        Training and certification

  


  

  


    
  


    