
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Living in Georgia
  

  
  
  
      
  Advice for British people living in Georgia, including information on health, education, residence requirements and more.   

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office

      
      Published
      20 November 2013
      Last updated
      
        23 March 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Overview

        
        
          Coronavirus

        
        
          Health

        
        
          Education

        
        
          Employment and recognised qualifications

        
        
          Entry and residence requirements

        
        
          Driving licences and vehicles

        
        
          Money and tax

        
        
          Guidance on bringing medication into Georgia

        
        
          Sponsoring family members

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Overview
This guide sets out essential information for British national residing in Georgia, including advice on health, education, benefits, residence requirements and more.

We are unable to provide any guidance on general lifestyle enquiries apart from the information and links listed below. See our information on what consulates can and cannot do for British nationals.

Coronavirus

You should follow the advice of Georgia’s government and your local authority. You can also read our Georgia travel advice for latest guidance.

For information on vaccines abroad, see our COVID-19 travel guidance.

Health
All state hospitals and state clinics provide treatment regardless of nationality. The emergency number in Georgia is 112. Although Georgia is listed on the website of the NHS trust as country with the reciprocal agreement, this does not work in practice as there is no reciprocal agreement between the two countries in place.

The NHS has information for people moving abroad.

You can check the list of medical facilities in Georgia here.

Education
The website for the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia has detailed information on education system in Georgia.

Employment and recognised qualifications

British citizens can apply to work in Georgia. Applications for Work resident permits are submitted through Public Service Hall.

If you are in Georgia for more than 183 days and take up any form of paid employment, you are automatically liable for income tax and must inform the Revenue Service of your employment, whether you are on a visitor’s permit or work resident permit. Non-compliance will be fined.

Labour and Employment Policy in Georgia can be found on the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia website

Entry and residence requirements

British nationals can enter Georgia visa free for up to 360 days. If they wish to stay longer they can apply for a temporary or permanent residence permit from the Public Service Development Agency of the Ministry of Justice of Georgia through Public Service Hall.

If you overstay in Georgia without a valid permit you may be deported and banned from re-entering Georgian territory for up to 1 year.

Your British passport should be valid for the proposed duration of intended stay. No additional period of validity beyond this is required.More information on entry and residence requirements can be found on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia website.

Driving licences and vehicles

British driving licences are accepted in Georgia. More information can be found on the Service Agency at the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia website (see “Useful Information” section).

Money and tax

See tax if you leave the UK to live abroad and tax on your UK income if you live abroad.

If you are in Georgia for more than 183 days and take up any form of paid employment, you are automatically liable for income tax. Information about taxes in Georgia can be obtained from the Revenue Service of Georgia website.

British citizens can open a bank account in any Georgian bank by providing photographic identification. Information about taxes in Georgia can be obtained from the Revenue Service of Georgia website.

Guidance on bringing medication into Georgia
British citizens can seek further advice from the Embassy of Georgia in the United Kingdom

Sponsoring family members
Guidance can be obtained from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia or from the Embassy of Georgia in the United Kingdom or by telephoning the ministry hotline (032) 2 945 000 (for in-country calls only).

Disclaimer
This information is provided as a general guide and is based upon information provided to the embassy by the relevant local authorities and may be subject to change at any time with little or no notice. The FCDO and the British Embassy will not be liable for any inaccuracies in this information. British nationals wishing to obtain any further information must contact the relevant local authority.




      
        
    Published 20 November 2013
    Last updated 23 March 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 March 2021
              Coronavirus section added with a link to guidance on vaccines
            
            
              16 September 2020
              formatting
            
            
              20 November 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Notarial and documentary services guide for Georgia

  




      

    Collection

  


        Living in country guides

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Europe

  


  

  


    
  


    