
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Join the Business Gateway Community
  

  
  
  
      
  How to join HM Land Registry’s Business Gateway Community.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          HM Land Registry

      
      Published
      7 May 2021
      Last updated
      
        19 July 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    
  
    
      Applies to England and Wales



      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          Who the community is for

        
        
          Join the Business Gateway Community

        
        
          Business Gateway Community events

        
        
          Community resources

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
You can use Business Gateway to access HM Land Registry services using an application programming interface (API) from your own technology platform or case management system.

The Business Gateway Community exists to:


  help HM Land Registry deliver services that meet customer needs
  create a two-way dialogue about the future of the Business Gateway service
  collaborate with customers and co-create new services
  test and get feedback on new services
  provide transparency on the roadmap and an opportunity for customers to input on the future direction of the service


Who the community is for

The Business Gateway Community is for organisations that benefit or could benefit from direct integration with HM Land Registry’s services using Business Gateway API.

To get a full range of views and requirements, we are looking for a mix of:


  conveyancers
  content management system (CMS) suppliers
  lenders
  government institutions
  estate agents
  housing developers


Join the Business Gateway Community

If you’re interested in helping us shape the future of the Business Gateway service, you can sign up to become a community member and take part in workshops, forums, surveys and interviews.


Sign up to the Business Gateway Community


Business Gateway Community events

Business Gateway Community members will be invited to online discussion forums every 4 to 8 weeks. At these events, members will hear from the Business Gateway development team and get the opportunity to ask questions, make suggestions and give their feedback on our plans.

Community resources

Find out more information about Business Gateway and how to apply.

Compatible software suppliers

Find out which suppliers have developed software to communicate with Business Gateway.

Applications forms

You can download our:


  Business Gateway application form
  Business Gateway application form for cloud providers


Terms and conditions

Read the Business Gateway connection terms and conditions for cloud providers.

Developer pack

Our Business Gateway developer pack provides information on developing the client side of the Business Gateway interface.





      
        
    Published 7 May 2021
    Last updated 19 July 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              19 July 2021
              We have updated the information about community events.
            
            
              7 May 2021
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        HM Land Registry's Business Gateway: compatible software suppliers
        Business Gateway developer pack
        Business Gateway connection terms and conditions for cloud providers
        Business Gateway application form for cloud providers
        Business Gateway application form

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Conveyancing services 

  


  

  


    
  


    