
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Ministry of Defence Police: Project Servator
  

  
  
  
      
  The MDP uses Project Servator to disrupt criminal activity, while providing a reassuring presence for the Defence community and public. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Ministry of Defence

      
      Published
      27 March 2018
      Last updated
      
        23 November 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About Project Servator

        
        
          Together, we’ve got it covered

        
        
          What you can expect to see

        
        
          What we need you to do

        
        
          Project Servator on social media

        
        
          More information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          

Project Servator vehicle checkpoint. Crown copyright.

About Project Servator

Project Servator aims to disrupt a range of criminal activity, including terrorism, while providing a reassuring presence for the public. Our officers are experienced and specially trained to spot the tell-tale signs that someone may be planning or preparing to commit a crime.

Together, we’ve got it covered

We believe that together, we’ve got it covered. We work with partners, including other police forces, security teams, businesses, the public, staff and visitors, to continue to protect Defence sites, people and assets and everyone in the surrounding communities, making it difficult for criminals and terrorists to operate.


Project Servator officer working with the Metropolitan Police Service. Crown copyright.

What you can expect to see

Project Servator deployments can happen at any time, anywhere. Our officers will arrive unannounced at various locations in and around sites we protect, including:


  Defence HQ, Whitehall
  Atomic Weapons Establishment sites at Aldermaston and Burghfield
  HM Naval Bases at Portsmouth, Clyde, and Devonport
  Royal Naval Armaments Depot, Coulport
  Menwith Hill


A surge capability is also available to deploy where required at locations and events across the UK.

Deployments can last for different lengths of time and involve varying numbers of officers and different resources. You’ll see highly visible uniformed officers who may also be working with plain clothes officers, armed police officers, police dogs, and marine police units, using different approaches and technology such as vehicle checkpoints, CCTV and Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR).


Police dog and handler assisting with vehicle search. Crown copyright.

You might also see us working with other police forces including British Transport Police, City of London Police, the Metropolitan Police Service, Police Scotland, Devon and Cornwall Police and local community policing teams.

Officers will talk to the public, local businesses, staff, visitors and security staff, to let them know what they’re doing and remind them to be vigilant, trust their instincts and report anything suspicious or that doesn’t seem right.

You will see posters on display boards and officers will hand out leaflets explaining more about Project Servator.

If you see our Project Servator officers in the workplace or in the surrounding area where you live or are visiting, there’s nothing to be concerned about. It is normal police activity designed to create a network of vigilance and disrupt those intent on committing crime, including terrorism.

Working with the community is a vital part of making Project Servator a success, so if you have any questions, please feel free to talk to our officers.


Project Servator officer talking to member of the public. Crown copyright.

What we need you to do

You have an important role to play in helping to keep safe Defence and surrounding communities, by reporting suspicious activity or anything that doesn’t seem right.

You’ll never get in trouble for reporting a genuine concern and we’ll always take your report seriously.

If you see something suspicious or if something just doesn’t seem right, trust your instincts, and report it to a police officer or member of security immediately. We’ll do the rest.


To report suspicious activity to the MDP, call 0300 1232 101. In an emergency always call 999.


You’ll find more information on what to look out for and how to report it on the ACT Website .

Project Servator on social media

We engage with the online community, sharing information about Project Servator.

Follow #ProjectServator and the MDP on:


  Facebook: @Ministry of Defence Police

  Twitter: @MODPolice



More information

Project Servator explainer - Project Servator explained: An animation that explains the policing tactic and the vital role the public can play in acting as extra eyes and ears, and reporting suspicious activity.


  
    Watch how the MDP uses Project Servator to protect Plymouth Naval Base: Forces Net video.
  
  
    Forces News Spotlight on MDP at HM Naval Base Devonport
  
  
    MDP continues to grow a network of vigilance
  
  
    Stay vigilant and report suspicious activity
  
  
    Highly commended Government Security Team Award for MDP Project Servator
  
  
    Project Servator - Keeping Defence safe
  
  
    MDP supports National Counter Terrorism Policing and promotes use of Project Servator at Christmas
  
  
    Pan London launch of Project Servator
  
  
    Project Servator one year on
  






      
        
    Published 27 March 2018
    Last updated 23 November 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              23 November 2021
              Updated page content.
            
            
              21 July 2021
              Updated emergency phone number.
            
            
              18 February 2019
              Updated guidance about Project Servator and how you can help.
            
            
              14 February 2019
              Updated sections on 'About Project Servator' and 'What we do'
            
            
              23 January 2019
              Updated guidance about Project Servator and how you can help.
            
            
              26 June 2018
              Added the Talk through magazine to the 'in the news' section.
            
            
              24 April 2018
              Added two new updates to the 'In the news' section of the page.
            
            
              27 March 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Ministry of Defence Police
        Ministry of Defence Police: misconduct hearings
        Talk Through magazine
        Ministry of Defence Police (Conduct, Performance and Appeals Tribunals) Regulations 2020
        Ministry of Defence Police: governance and accountablity

  




      

    Collection

  


        Ministry of Defence Police

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Defence and armed forces
        Counter-terrorism
        Crime prevention

  


  

  


    
  


    