
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Disability Confident and CIPD: guide for line managers on employing people with a disability or health condition
  

  
  

  
    
  A practical guide for line managers on recruiting, managing and developing people with a disability or health condition. The guidance is part of the Disability Confident campaign. 

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Work and Pensions

      
      Published
      21 November 2018
      Last updated
      
        26 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Guide for line managers: Recruiting, managing and developing people with a disability or health condition
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Guide for line managers: Recruiting, managing and developing people with a disability or health condition
    
        PDF, 666KB, 43 pages
    


  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This guidance focuses on the role of the line manager in workplace adjustments, langauge and behaviour and sickness absence. It also provides guidance on recruiting, retaining and developing employees with a disability or health condition.

It has been created by the Disability Confident scheme in collaboration with CIPD, a professional body for HR and people development.

The Disability Confident scheme aims to help employers make the most of the opportunities provided by employing and developing disabled people.

It is voluntary and has been developed by employers, disabled people’s representatives and the government. The scheme has 3 levels that have been designed to support employers on their Disability Confident journey.


Sign up to the Disability Confident scheme.





        
      

      
    Published 21 November 2018
    Last updated 26 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              26 November 2020
              New section 'disabled people and COVID-19' added to the guidance.
            
            
              21 November 2018
              First published.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Help and support for young disabled people to find and stay in work
        Report changes to your Disability Confident details
        Renew your Disability Confident status
        Disability Confident service providers
        Disability Confident 1 year on: breaking down the barriers to employment

  




      

    Collection

  


        Disability Confident employer scheme

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Work and disabled people
        Disability rights

  


  

  


    
  


    