
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Intellectual property mediation
  

  
  
  
      
  Mediation is a type of alternative dispute resolution and may help you resolve an intellectual property dispute.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Intellectual Property Office

      
      Published
      3 May 2014
      Last updated
      
        3 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          The IPO’s mediation service

        
        
          How to book a mediation session

        
        
          Benefits of mediation

        
        
          Contact the team

        
        
          Other mediation providers

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
Mediation is a method of alternative dispute resolution which seeks to resolve intellectual property (IP) disputes without the need to go to court. The mediator’s role is not to make a decision on the dispute, but to help both parties reach an amicable solution.

The Intellectual Property Office (IPO) offers a mediation service to parties involved in an IP-related dispute covering; trade marks, copyright, designs and patents.

The IPO’s mediation service

The IPO employs accredited mediators qualified to mediate matters relating to the full range of IP (patents, trade marks, designs, copyright, trade secrets, and related commercial matters).

The cost of the service is dependent on the type and length of session desired.

Online mediations


  
    
      1 Hour
      £75
    
    
      2 Hours
      £100
    
    
      3 Hours
      £125
    
    
      4 Hours
      £150
    
    
      5 Hours
      £175
    
    
      6 Hours
      £200
    
    
      7 Hours
      £225
    
    
      8 Hours
      £250
    
  


In person mediations


  
    
      1 Hour
      £152.50
    
    
      2 Hours
      £177.50
    
    
      3 Hours
      £287.50
    
    
      4 Hours
      £312.50
    
    
      5 Hours
      £337.50
    
    
      6 Hours
      £362.50
    
    
      7 Hours
      £387.50
    
    
      8 Hours
      £412.50
    
  


Please note: Rates quoted are per party and exclude room hire
(room hire is offered free of charge where the session is held at IPO’s Newport or London office).

Note: If all parties wish to extend their session on the day, a fee of £100 per hour per party will be charged.

The session can be held at the IPO’s Newport and London offices at no extra charge, or elsewhere in the UK at your discretion.

The service can help you resolve disputes related to:


  licencing
  ownership/entitlement
  infringement
  trade mark opposition
  technology/knowledge transfer between companies and/or Universities and Technology Transfer Offices


If your dispute type is not listed and you think mediation may be a good option for you, please contact the team at mediation@ipo.gov.uk who can advise further.

How to book a mediation session

If you wish to resolve your dispute via the IPO’s mediation service, you will first need agreement from the opposing party. You can do this yourself or via a legal representative if you have one.

You may wish to use this template contact form (ODT, 6.32KB)  when making contact with the opposing party.

Once you have agreed to mediate, you should then contact the IPO at mediation@ipo.gov.uk with the following information:


  contact details for each party involved in the dispute (including yourself)
  a brief overview of the dispute
  an indication as to when you would like the mediation to take place


The mediation team will then liaise with all parties and the mediator to arrange a mutually convenient date, location and time. You will also receive confirmation of costs for your records.

Benefits of mediation

There are many benefits to mediation such as:


  
    quicker and cheaper than litigation - allowing you time to focus on your business and not be distracted by lengthy and costly litigation proceedings
  
  
    high success rate - the large majority of mediations reach an agreement on the day and other disputes reach resolution as a direct result of the mediation process
  
  
    confidential - whatever the outcome, it will remain private (preserving business reputations) unlike a court hearing which is open to the public
  
  
    opportunities - mediation offers the opportunity to maintain existing commercial relationships, as well as the chance to forge new ones
  


Contact the team

If you have any questions about the service or would like to discuss your suitability for mediation, please contact the team using your preferred method below.

E-mail: mediation@ipo.gov.uk

Telephone: 0300 300 2000

or write to:



Mediation Service 
Intellectual Property Office 
Concept House 
Cardiff Road 
Newport 
South Wales 
NP10 8QQ 
United Kingdom



Please note that you must accept liability for the transmission of any information you send us or ask to receive from us via e-mail.

Other mediation providers

There are many other individuals and organisations providing a mediation service to the public. Some have contacted the IPO to say they can mediate IP related disputes. The IPO has listed these providers along with information they have provided about their service(s) mediation providers  (PDF, 237KB, 12 pages).

It is not appropriate for us to recommend particular providers but you may wish to assess their suitability while choosing a mediation provider.





      
        
    Published 3 May 2014
    Last updated 3 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              3 November 2020
              Mediation fees updated.
            
            
              22 October 2019
              Mediation providers document updated.
            
            
              17 September 2019
              Mediation providers list updated.
            
            
              13 July 2018
              Mediation providers document updated.
            
            
              19 June 2018
              Mediation content updated.
            
            
              2 July 2015
              Revised content.
            
            
              23 June 2015
              Updated mediation providers list added.
            
            
              14 May 2015
              Mediator Philip A. Hannay details added to the Mediation Providers list.
            
            
              16 March 2015
              Updated details within mediation providers for, WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center (Geneva).
            
            
              3 May 2014
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        How to file documents with the Intellectual Property Office
        Intellectual Property: mediation
        Trade marks: standard opposition
        License, mortgage, transfer, merge and market your trade mark
        Tribunal practice notice (2/2016): Costs in proceedings before the Comptroller

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Patent disputes resolution: hearings
        Designs disputes resolution: hearings
        Trade mark disputes resolution: hearings
        Enforcing your copyright

  




      

    Collection

  


        IP for business: events, guidance, tools and case studies

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Copyright
        Designs
        Patents
        Trade marks

  


  

  


    
  


    