
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Combined heat and power
  

  
  
  
      
  How the UK supports the use of combined heat and power (CHP) or 'cogeneration', which avoids network losses and reduces emissions.


  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

      
      Published
      22 January 2013
      Last updated
      
        6 October 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          About CHP


        
        
          
CHP Focus

        
        
          
CHP Focus Helpline

        
        
          
CHP Site Assessment tool

        
        
          
CHP Development Map

        
        
          
CHP Scheme Database

        
        
          
CHP Developer Guides

        
        
          Case Studies

        
        
          
CHP Outreach Events

        
        
          
EC Directive on promotion of CHP in the internal energy market

        
        
          Further information

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
About CHP


Combined heat and power (CHP) is a highly efficient process that captures and utilises the heat that is a by-product of the electricity generation process.

By generating heat and power simultaneously, CHP can reduce carbon emissions by up to 30% compared to the separate means of conventional generation via a boiler and power station.

The heat generated during this process is supplied to an appropriately matched heat demand that would otherwise be met by a conventional boiler. CHP systems are highly efficient, making use of the heat which would otherwise be wasted when generating electrical or mechanical power. This allows heat requirements to be met that would otherwise require additional fuel to be burnt.

For many organisations, CHP is the measure that offers the most significant single opportunity to reduce energy costs and to improve environmental performance with existing users of CHP typically saving around 20% of their energy costs.

What is Combined Heat and Power (CHP)

What are the advantages of CHP?


  
CHP typically has an efficiency of over 80%
  operators typically saving around 20% on energy bills
  operators can save up to 30% on carbon emissions
  transmission and distribution losses are reduced
  increases fuel supply security



CHP Focus

CHP Focus is a BEIS initiative, that is free at the point of use, which supports the development of combined heat and power in the UK. It supports the development of CHP by providing information, education and online tools that assist CHP developers, whether they are newcomers to CHP or those that are familiar and looking for specific information.

It does this by offering a helpline service, a CHP Site Assessment Tool, the UK CHP Development Map, a CHP Scheme Database, a suite of CHP developer guides, a series of CHP case studies and through CHP outreach events.

See the following sections of this page to access CHP Focus content.


CHP Focus Helpline

A free support helpline, providing guidance on CHP:

Helpline email: chpfocus@ricardo.com

Helpline number: 01235 75 3033

Mon-Fri 9am - 4pm



CHP Site Assessment tool

This free tool allows users to get an indicative assessment and review potential options for installing CHP on a particular site. It has been designed for users who have limited knowledge of CHP. It guides the user through the information required to carry out an indicative assessment, showing whether a particular site warrants further investigation.


You can use the CHP Site Assessment Tool to review options for installing CHP on a particular site.



CHP Development Map
The UK CHP Development Map is designed to geographically represent the heat demand across various sectors with the United Kingdom.


You can use the CHP Development Map to find about heat demand for a given area.



CHP Scheme Database
The data published on this site was obtained via the CHPQA programme from schemes who gave their permission for the information to be published. The following data for CHP schemes is published:


  
CHP Site Name
  Prime Mover
  Industry Sector
  Generating Capacity (kWe)
  Region



You can use the CHP Scheme Database to view existing CHP sites.



CHP Developer Guides

A collection of guides to support the development of combined heat and power (CHP) installations


Guides for CHP developers:

Part 1: CHP Project Development

Part 2: CHP Technologies

Part 3: CHP Environmental

Part 4: CHP Operation and Maintenance

Part 5: CHP Finance

Part 6: Additional Guidance for Renewable CHP



CHP Project Development
The development process requires a significant commitment in terms of time, as well as specialist and multidisciplinary expertise, incurring both cost and effort. The development process for a CHP project depends on a scheme’s complexity; see the CHP developers guide for detailed information on packaged, custom and renewable CHP.


CHP Technology
A CHP plant consists essentially of an electrical generator combined with equipment for recovering and using the heat produced by that generator. The generator may be a prime mover such as a gas turbine or a reciprocating engine. Alternatively, it may consist of a steam turbine generating power from high-pressure steam produced in a boiler. In some cases, a CHP scheme may be a combination of prime mover(s), boiler(s) and steam turbine(s). See the detailed guide to CHP technologies for further information on:


  Packaged CHP

  Custom CHP

  Micro CHP and
  Renewable CHP




CHP Environmental Issues
For any given CHP plant and operating pattern, annual energy consumption/production can be used as the basis for calculating reductions in primary energy consumption and emissions that arise from the installation and operation of the CHP unit. See the detailed guide on environmental aspects of CHP installations including:


  current legislation
  relevant atmospheric emissions data, and
  meeting environmental requirements



CHP Operation and Maintenance
Once the CHP package has been installed, it needs to be operated and maintained correctly if it is to provide the planned levels of cost savings. There are examples of CHP plants that have not achieved their expectations, due to a lack of effective supervision and maintenance.

This guide on CHP operations and maintenance provides an in depth view of plant operations, plant maintenance, and performance monitoring and assessment.


CHP Financing
There are several approaches to costing and financing a CHP development.

The guide to CHP Finance reviews methods for establishing the capital, fuel and maintenance costs. The impact of financing CHP on a company’s balance sheet is reviewed. The guide covers the common methods of financing the investment of CHP and show how to compare the projected performance of CHP against conventional methods of heat and electrical generation.

Renewable CHP

Government support for renewable CHP has increased the number of such schemes and
has diversified the range of CHP prime movers in use.

The additional guidance for renewable CHP has been developed to complement the other guidance and provide additional information to suit the recent developments in renewable CHP. The content in this guide focuses on CHP schemes that use ORC and steam screw expander technologies.

Case Studies
A series of selected CHP case studies are available.


CHP Outreach Events


Programme: Reducing energy costs with Combined Heat & Power


  Location: Birmingham
  
    Date: Tuesday, 16 June 2015
See the presentations for the CHP Outreach workshops’ held in Birmingham.
  
  Location: Manchester
  
    Date: Thursday 12 March 2015
  
  Location: London
  Date: Tuesday 10 March 2015


See the presentations for the CHP Outreach workshops held in London and Manchester.



EC Directive on promotion of CHP in the internal energy market

This Directive, developed by the European Commission (EC) in 2004, aims to promote high-efficiency cogeneration given the potential benefits with regard to saving primary energy, avoiding network losses and reducing emissions, in particular of greenhouse gases. In addition, efficient use of energy by CHP can contribute positively to the security of energy supply. The Directive supports the installation of CHP where there is a significant demand for heat. Its main measures include:


  a single methodology for establishing high efficiency CHP across EU member states
  a ‘guarantee of origin’ for electricity from CHP sources
  obligations on EU member states to analyse national potentials for high-efficiency CHP and report progress on its development
  evaluation of the different ways EU member states support CHP

  ensure equitable or preferential access for CHP on the electricity transmission and distribution networks
  encouraging EU member states to evaluate their own legislative and regulatory framework with a view to removing barriers to the uptake of CHP



Read the Directive in full: European Union Directive 2012/27/EU on energy efficiency

UK involvement in the Directive

The department supports the aims of the Directive, and were actively involved in its development. Our priority is to ensure it benefits CHP development in the UK.

Further information

For any technical enquiry, email CHP Focus chpfocus@ricardo.com

Ricardo Energy and Environment provide an enquiry service for CHP developers on behalf of BEIS.

You can use the public register of Council documents to read about the latest developments.

For more information, email hannah.taylor@beis.gov.uk





      
        
    Published 22 January 2013
    Last updated 6 October 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              6 October 2020
              Added description and link to new guidance on Renewable CHP.
            
            
              12 May 2020
              BEIS contact updated to Hannah Taylor: hannah.taylor@beis.gov.uk
            
            
              20 February 2018
              Removed invalid helpline number  08453655153
            
            
              10 February 2017
              CHP case studies have been uploaded.
            
            
              19 May 2015
              CHP Outreach Event in Birmingham is announced.
            
            
              25 February 2015
              CHP Outreach Events In Bath and Birmingham are cancelled.
            
            
              6 February 2015
              Announcement of CHP outreach events for Local Authorities and Elected Council Members.
            
            
              5 November 2014
              Revised broken links
            
            
              22 January 2013
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Combined Heat and Power (CHP) technology
        Combined Heat and Power (CHP) developers guides
        Combined Heat and Power: additional guidance for renewable CHP
        CHP Outreach workshops - 2015 presentations
        Combined Heat and Power (CHP) environmental aspect

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do








  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Low carbon energy

  


  

  


    
  


    