
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology: government or NATO end-use)
  

  
  

  
    
  Licence for the export of military goods to a government or a NATO organisation in any of the destinations or countries listed in the OGEL.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Export Control Joint Unit and Department for International Trade

      
      Published
      1 July 2013
      Last updated
      
        7 June 2021
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology: government or NATO end use) 
    
        PDF, 258KB, 15 pages
    


  

  
      
  
  
    Revoked: Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology: government or NATO end use)
    
        PDF, 808KB, 15 pages
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email exportcontrol.help@trade.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
This open general export licence (OGEL) allows, subject to certain conditions, the export of military goods, software or technology, to a government or a NATO organisation in any of the destinations or countries listed in the licence.

This version of the licence is available for registration.

You will need to download the military goods, software and technology undertaking template to use this OGEL.

If you do not meet the conditions of this licence, you may be able to use the OGEL (military goods, software and technology). This allows, subject to certain conditions, the export of a wide range of military equipment to any person or entity in the listed destinations.

Reporting requirements
This OGEL is subject to reporting requirements under the open licence returns transparency initiative.

Classified goods

If the goods are classified, you are likely to require Form 680 clearance if you are planning to use this OGEL.

Revoked licences

The most recent revoked licence is available in the documents section.

You can find older revoked versions of the OGEL (military goods, software and technology: government or NATO end use) on the National Archives website.




        
      

      
    Published 1 July 2013
    Last updated 7 June 2021
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              7 June 2021
              These licences have been amended to take into account changes to the list of defence-related products.
            
            
              31 December 2020
              This Open General Export Licence has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              17 December 2020
              This OGEL has been revised to take into account changes in legislation following the end of the transition period.
            
            
              18 February 2019
              Licence republished following addition of control list entry ML21.b.4.
            
            
              24 July 2018
              Republished to clarify that an approved F1686 can be considered a written letter of approval from MOD.
            
            
              6 April 2018
              Licence updated and amended to reflect new contact details for the Export Control Joint Unit.
            
            
              1 March 2017
              This licence has been republished to reflect amendments to the Export Control Order 2008.
            
            
              6 October 2015
              Ministry of Defence (MOD) security requirements have been clarified.
            
            
              13 June 2014
              Licence amended to reflect the new Government Security Classification System.
            
            
              1 January 2014
              Updated to reflect new reporting process in connection with the transparency initiative.
            
            
              1 July 2013
              First published.
            
            
              18 January 2013
              New licence came into force on 11 January 2013 and replaces OGEL (military goods: government or NATO end-use) dated 8 August 2012.
            
        
      



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Open general export licence (military goods, software and technology)
        Military goods, software and technology undertaking template
        Open individual export licence (OIEL) undertaking template
        End-user undertaking (EUU) form
        Open general export licences for technology for military goods

  




      

    Collection

  


        Open general export licences (OGELs)

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Military equipment, logistics and technology

  


  

  


    
  


    