
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Applying to the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework
  

  
  
  
      
  How to apply to sell digital outcomes, specialists and user research services to government on the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Government Digital Service and Crown Commercial Service

      
      Published
      4 December 2015
      Last updated
      
        17 November 2020
          — 
            See all updates
          
      
  

    
    
    
  









  
    


      
      
          
    
      Contents

    
        
          When you can apply

        
        
          Types of digital services you can sell

        
        
          Eligibility

        
        
          How to apply

        
        
          Asking ‘clarification’ questions during the application process

        
        
          Submitting your application

        
        
          After you apply

        
        
          If you’re successful

        
        
          How to respond to buyers and apply for opportunities

        
        
          Changing details after you’ve applied

        
    

      
    
      

    Print this page


        

    
          
The public sector uses the Digital Marketplace to buy digital services.

You apply on the Digital Marketplace to sell digital services through the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework.


A framework is an agreement between suppliers and government - all suppliers agree to the same terms when they apply.


The application process is different if you want to sell cloud services on the G-Cloud framework.

Crown Commercial Service (CCS) manages the framework, for example the terms and conditions, supplier evaluations and compliance. Government Digital Service (GDS) manages the Digital Marketplace service.

When you can apply

You cannot currently apply to join the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework. Applications are usually available every 9 to 18 months.

Sign up for emails about when you can apply and for updates on frameworks.

Types of digital services you can sell

The services on the Digital Outcomes and Specialist framework are categorised into:


  digital outcomes: you’ll provide teams to work on a digital service, for example a booking system or an accessibility audit
  digital specialists: you’ll provide specialists, like a product manager or developer, to work on a  specific piece of work
  user research studios: you’ll provide facilities to carry out interviews and usability tests
  user research participants: you’ll find people to take part in research interviews and usability tests


Eligibility

The Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework is open to suppliers of all sizes. You do not need to be based in the UK.

You can arrange for third parties to do some of the work (‘subcontracting’) or provide the service through a group of suppliers (‘consortia’). A buyer must agree to subcontracting or a consortium arrangement before they buy.

The full legal rules and eligibility are published in documents called the ‘Call-Off Contract’ and ‘Framework Contract’. The most up-to-date documents will be available on your Digital Marketplace account when you apply.

You’ll also need to agree to certain obligations as a CCS supplier, such as submitting management information (MI) returns.

There are also different rules depending on what category (‘lots’) the services are in.

Rules for digital outcomes services

As a digital outcomes supplier, you must:


  comply with the technology code of practice

  work according to the government service design manual

  understand what it means to work on different phases of agile delivery  (alpha, beta, live, retirement)


You must provide services within at least one of the following capabilities:


  performance analysis and data
  security
  service delivery
  software development
  support and operations
  testing and auditing
  user experience and design
  user research


Rules for digital specialists

As a digital specialists supplier, you must:


  offer evidence of competence in each role if requested by the buyer
  ensure all roles support the government service design manual’s description of what you need to build a successful service

  provide specialists who are employed or subcontracted by you; at the point you respond to a buyer opportunity, the proposed specialist is a member of your team (and has a contractual relationship with you, such that they cannot be offered as a resource by any other supplier)


You must provide at least one of the following roles:


  agile coach
  business analyst
  communications specialist
  content designer or copywriter
  cyber security specialist
  data architect
  data engineer
  data scientist
  delivery manager or project manager
  designer
  developer
  performance analyst
  portfolio manager
  product manager
  programme delivery manager
  quality assurance analyst
  service manager
  technical architect
  user researcher
  web operations engineer


Rules for user research studios

As a user research studios supplier, you must provide:


  user research studios hire in the right location on specific dates
  a comfortable, private and safe environment for participants, researchers and observers to work in
  space to conduct interviews, usability tests or focus groups
  facilities where it’s possible to watch and record people as they engage with designs, prototypes and live public sector services


Rules for user research participants

As a user research participants supplier, you must be able to:


  recruit participants with a range of experience, for example you should consider diversity, people who are digitally excluded, as well as those who have low literacy or digital skills, and those who need assisted digital support
  recruit user research participants who best reflect the users of a service, for example a specific target user group such as victims, witnesses or jurors


How to apply

Follow these steps to apply.



Create an account or log into your existing account. You’ll need a Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS number) if you’re creating an account.


Click ‘Start application’ to begin the Digital Outcomes and Specialists application process.


Make the supplier declaration.


Provide information about your services.


Each step in this process is mandatory.

You can add extra contributors to your account to help you add services more quickly.

Making the supplier declaration on the Digital Marketplace

You must make the supplier declaration. If you don’t complete it you will not be able to provide services on the Digital Marketplace.

The parts of the supplier declaration are:


  providing suitable services
  what it means to be on Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5
  grounds for mandatory exclusion
  grounds for discretionary exclusion
  working with government
  how you apply
  application accuracy
  how you’ll deliver your services
  modern slavery
  contact details


You’ll need to agree to certain obligations on the framework, such as submitting monthly information (MI) management returns.

Adding service information on the Digital Marketplace

You need to provide your service details on the Digital Marketplace. 
You’ll be asked to include information like where you can provide services and pricing details.

Each service you want to include needs to fit into one of these categories (called ‘lots)’:


  digital outcomes
  digital specialists
  user research studios
  user research participants


You can look at past and present opportunities to see the kind of services buyers need.

You can apply to provide services in as many categories as you want. If you’re accepted on to the framework, you cannot supply services in a category you didn’t sign up for.

Each service you add must be marked as ‘complete’ on the Digital Marketplace.

Your application will be automatically submitted for Digital Outcomes and Specialists on the deadline day if you’ve also made your supplier declaration.

Asking ‘clarification’ questions during the application process

You can ask ‘clarification’ questions during the application process. All questions about this procurement must be submitted through the Digital Marketplace on the Digital Outcomes and Specialists updates page.

You will not get an individual response to your question.

All questions and answers will be posted regularly in a PDF on the Digital Outcomes and Specialists updates page. Anyone who has started an application will be notified when new clarification questions and answers are available.

Contact Crown Commercial Service if you have any technical issues with the Digital Marketplace.


Crown Commercial Service
cloud_digital@crowncommercial.gov.uk


Commercially sensitive clarification questions

You may not want the answer to your question to be published. In this situation, you should explain when you submit the question why you believe that making the question and response public would put you at a disadvantage.

If there is not sufficient justification for withholding the question and answer, you’ll be asked to decide if:


  the question and the response should in fact be published
  you want to withdraw the question


Submitting your application

Your application will be submitted automatically if you have completed your supplier declaration and details for at least one service. You do not need to manually submit your application.

After you apply

Once it’s submitted, CCS will evaluate the information you provide in your application against the criteria published in the Invitation to Tender (ITT), Call-Off Contract and Framework Agreement.

These documents are provided in your Digital Marketplace account.

It takes around 8 weeks.

You’ll be told if you’re successful through your Digital Marketplace account.

If you’re successful

You’ll enter into an agreement with CCS. Your framework agreement will be available in your account on the Digital Marketplace. You’ll need to sign your framework agreement and upload it to your account within 10 working days of getting it.

You will not be able to provide services on the framework if you do not sign and return the framework agreement.

Your services will be made available on the Digital Marketplace as soon as the framework goes live.

The maximum length of a contract is 2 years with an optional 25% extension. For example, a contract length of 1 year, could have a maximum extension of 3 months (25%).

How to respond to buyers and apply for opportunities

You’ll use the Digital Marketplace to find and respond to buyer requirements. Find out how to sell your services and apply for opportunities on the Digital Marketplace.

Changing details after you’ve applied

You can change some information, like your company’s details, on your Digital Marketplace account.

You can change these service details:


  team capabilities
  locations where your team or specialist is available to work
  specialist roles you offer
  user research studio details
  recruitment approach and participant location


You cannot add services to new categories (‘lots’):


  after applications close
  when you’ve been accepted onto the framework


Contact CCS to update these service details.


Crown Commercial Service
cloud_digital@crowncommercial.gov.uk


Buyers can request evidence of any changes you make.





      
        
    Published 4 December 2015
    Last updated 17 November 2020
      + show all updates
      
        
            
              17 November 2020
              Updated: Applications for Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5 are now closed.
            
            
              10 November 2020
              Updated closing date to Tuesday 17 November 2020.
            
            
              9 October 2020
              Applications for Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5 are now open
            
            
              28 September 2020
              Removed 'design' from list of capabilities under Rules for digital outcomes services.
            
            
              18 September 2020
              The Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5 framework will open for applications on 9 October 2020.
            
            
              21 August 2019
              The Digital Marketplace support email address has changed to cloud_digital@crowncommercial.gov.uk.
            
            
              15 August 2019
              Applications to join the Digital Specialists and Outcomes 4 framework have now closed.
            
            
              8 July 2019
              The Digital Outcomes and Specialists 4 framework is now open for applications until 5pm on 15 August 2019.
            
            
              27 June 2019
              This guide has been restructured for clarity. The title has changed to 'Applying to the Digital Specialists and Outcomes framework'. The application opening date (8 July) has been added. The maximum length of a contract has been changed from '24 months' to '24 months with an optional 6 months extension'. 
Added information about supplier responsibilities on the framework in the 'Eligibility' section. Removed information about service standards and applying for opportunities, how to find that information is under the  'How to respond to buyers and apply for opportunities' heading.
            
            
              10 June 2019
              The Digital Outcomes and Specialists 4 framework will open for applications on 8 July 2019.
            
            
              1 October 2018
              Updated to reflect new specialist roles available through Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3.
            
            
              22 August 2018
              The Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3 framework is closed for applications
            
            
              18 July 2018
              Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3 is open for applications until 5pm BST, 22 August 2018.
            
            
              13 July 2018
              Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3 opens for applications on 18 July
            
            
              22 March 2018
              Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3 open for applications in July 2018
            
            
              18 December 2017
              Revised Digital Outcomes and Specialists 3 opening date
            
            
              14 December 2016
              Updated to show that Digital Outcomes and Specialists is closed for applications.
            
            
              1 June 2016
              Added links to new suppliers' guides on applying to opportunities
            
            
              20 April 2016
              Added links to new Digital Outcomes and Specialists guides and new supplier logins
            
            
              4 December 2015
              First published.
            
        
      



          
      

      
        
          
    
      
    
    Contents


        
      
  
    

    Print this page

  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      


  


        Responding to buyer requirements on the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework
        Applying to the G-Cloud framework
        Buying services on the Digital Marketplace
        How to hire user research studios on the Digital Marketplace
        How Digital Marketplace suppliers have been evaluated

  




      

    Detailed guidance

  


        Terms and conditions of Digital Marketplace frameworks
        Responding to buyer requirements on the Digital Outcomes and Specialists framework
        Digital Outcomes and Specialists 5 legal documents

  


  









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government spending

  


  

  


    
  


    