 has to make the hard decisions for what platforms like Facebook and YouTube can do: These are many such platform policy questions—and we are stuck within an endless argument around ‘who decides’ the answers. Should corporations and their ostensibly unaccountable CEOs decide? Or should it be governments with their partisan, special interest, and sometimes even authoritarian motivations?We propose a third way: . Governing platforms democratically.Of course, this sounds . Clearly, Tim Cook, Mark Zuckerburg and their CEO colleagues won’t be giving up their seats for a “platform president” anytime soon. Moreover, the last time someone tried to run a platform referendum it was a  .However, thankfully, elections and referendums are not the only forms of democracy. In the past decade especially, countries all over the world have begun experimenting with new(ish) forms of democracy—and it turns out that some work very well. In fact, they work especially well for the messy issues that are hyperpolarized or where no powerful actor can really be trusted.As a concrete example, consider how  one of these new democratic processes, the “Citizens’ Assembly”, to develop new climate policy in the wake of the Yellow Vest protests. Similar methods have been  to untangle political deadlocks on abortion and in South Korea to . In each case, a specific highly controversial and complex set of issues was tackled over a fixed time period by a “mini-public”—a statistically representative group of hundreds of ordinary people who were trained by neutral facilitators and briefed by stakeholders. The result of the processes were .  While one can imagine many potential issues with such processes, we now have significant practical and empirical evidence that these issues can be overcome, as we describe below. These new democratic processes are not a panacea, but they can enable platforms to take some of their most challenging issues to their ‘governed’ populations—and this can benefit those populations, the platforms, and functional democratic governments (while perhaps even weakening the mandates of authoritarian governments).Many purported fixes to platform problems involve giving individual users more options; e.g. if you want to see less sensationalist and divisive content, a platform might let you tweak your personal recommendations. But this individual agency “solution” does not solve the  problems that the sensationalism and divisiveness might cause for a community, nation, or the planet—and it could even make those problems worse. Platform democracy provides a way forward—democratic processes and legitimacy for exerting the necessary to address such thorny problems.In this working paper, we focus primarily on adapting the citizen assembly process to platform democracy—the ; later work will touch on alternative and complementary processes in more detail. We first provide a brief overview of the democratic rationale behind these governance processes, and citizens’ assemblies in particular. We then summarize the standard process and provide a concrete example of what a “platform assembly” involving Facebook and political advertisements might look like. Finally, we provide a supplement with answers to frequently asked questions from stakeholders around platform democracy and the platform assembly process we focus on here.Democracy is generally associated with elections and elected representatives, but this is a means, not an end. The essence of democracy and the strength of its mandate arguably relies on the deeper ideals of  and . In fact, existing implementations of electoral democracy may lose trust as people see them diverging from these ideals.As an alternative, modern democratic processes such as citizens’ assemblies explore different mechanisms for ensuring representation and deliberation, addressing many of the pitfalls of electoral democracy (e.g. poor knowledge of the issues, low engagement, politicization, little incentive to understand others perspectives, destabilizing electoral campaigns, lobbying, etc.). Instead they rely on the hypothesis that if one takes a representative sample of a population, and provides them compensation, training, expertise, facilitation, and stakeholder perspectives, they can make good decisions that provide a broad mandate. Moreover, unlike electoral processes which often incentivize polarization, deliberative processes can support common ground. The significant successes of these approaches around the world have helped validate these hypotheses—even though it is surprising to many that people chosen by lottery are sufficiently capable (in the right environment) such that they can be key parts of a policy-making process.Importantly for the purposes of effective (and pragmatically feasible) platform democracy, many of these processes are difficult to game, do not require unsustainable levels of public engagement, are comparatively inexpensive, are rapidly implementable, are easily iterable, and work at any scale. While there are a number of new processes that hold promise, for simplicity and concreteness we focus here on citizens’ assemblies.There are three core phases to most existing Citizens’ Assemblies:The assembly acts as a —it has the same demographics as the population it is convened to serve due to representative sampling, so most of that broader population can identify with a participant who has had a similar life experience or background to them (compared to e.g. politicians who generally have a narrower set of life experiences and demographics). Throughout the assembly process,  are conducted with stakeholders, experts, and assembly participants and are . These combine to , supporting a greater understanding of and a stronger mandate for the decisions (small group deliberations remain private). Most people are understandably extremely skeptical when first presented with the concept of the citizen assembly and related representative deliberative processes. While it is out of scope in this whitepaper to address each of these critiques in detail, and how they are overcome in practice, we provide some excerpts from a recent paper in , each citing additional research from deliberative processes and experiments around the world:Initial implementation of a platform assembly would likely be focused on a regional or nation-specific issue, in a location with a single dominant language, and where the platform has deep regional knowledge. The lessons learned can thereafter be applied to broader and more diverse assemblies; including fully global assemblies appropriate for a global platform. Here is an example of what the end-to-end process might look like for a citizens’ assembly on political advertisements in the United States on Facebook:A few things worth noting about this example: First, there is a specific scope and predefined commitment, which are then entrusted to a neutral third-party for implementation. Secondly, this is a simplified example for a single platform and country. It would be ideal to have global assemblies for global policy decisions. Multiple platforms could also choose to bind themselves to the outcome of a single assembly held in collaboration with multiple governments. Finally, the entire process from initiation to conclusion for a given issue could be completed in under three months (depending on the scope).Existing democratic governments have a crucial role to play in ensuring that online platforms provide value to their constituents. However, some issues may be specific to particular platforms and their unique properties, and broad lawmaking may have negative unintended consequences. Moreover, even governments do not always have jurisdiction (especially with regards to some speech issues), and because these decisions may affect their electability, they may not be seen as impartial either. It is of course possible that governments themselves independently run assemblies that develop policy for all platforms, but they may also have trouble getting the political will for this. Conversely, this is a case where platforms can help accelerate collaboration by taking advantage of their relative speed to initiate a process, and then the facilitating organization can fully involve the government as stakeholders. At least initially, this is not substantially different from the way platform policies currently interact with existing law, regulation, and precedent. The only difference would be that whatever proposals a representative assembly settles on after learning from stakeholders, facilitators, and each other would have more of a mandate than unilateral choices by platform employees. In some cases, this might arguably violate existing law, and then the platform (according to whatever policy it has decided on) may choose to challenge that law, abide by it, or ignore it—analogously to how WhatsApp and Twitter are . The ability to safely involve representative participants living within an authoritarian or pseudo-authoritarian regime will likely vary on a case-by-case basis, as will the influence of platform assembly mandates. It seems plausible that a global assembly could make it more difficult for such a regime to argue that a national law at odds with the outcome of such an assembly actually serves their population; whether that makes only a small difference in the mandate of that law or a large difference will also likely depend on the specific case.Many global online platforms impact everyone, even if indirectly, and so we might strive for an ideal where everyone in a population would have an equal chance to serve in a platform assembly. Moreover, the mandate and legitimacy of an assembly becomes much stronger with better representation. This means that organizers of such assemblies should seek to ensure that the initial pool is as comprehensive as possible, and that sufficient resources are allocated to participants to ensure that everyone selected can join. Some international pilots of assemblies include not only those with poor connectivity, but even provide support for participants who are not literate, so it is likely that access obstacles will become more surmountable as our experience with such processes increases. While perfect representation is likely unattainable, this model is likely to be more representative than many traditional forms of democracy. Scholars, advocates, and practitioners have different perspectives on where this approach is most useful—some believe it should be used everywhere while others believe in a much narrower scope. The OECD guide to this sort of deliberative process (based on hundreds of implementations) describes it as “best used for addressing values-driven policy dilemmas, complex problems that require trade-offs, and long-term issues that go beyond the short-term incentives of electoral cycles.”Like an expert advisory board, a platform assembly would convene many experts and stakeholders in order to inform decision-makers and get to the best possible decision. However, unlike an advisory board, the “decision-makers” are the actual people being affected, with minimal monetary or reputational incentives to take actions that might be better for the company, a political party, or a particular interest group.The Facebook Oversight Board is more similar to an expert advisory board with judicial-style powers. Its independence from Facebook provides significant value, and the “elite experts” doing the decision-making appear to be taking their responsibilities very seriously—but it is still an elite body.With a platform assembly, one still gets the ‘technocratic’ benefit of elite experts, since they will be brought in to inform the assembly members. However, , leading to choices that take into account the experiences of ordinary people—and thus giving a much stronger “people’s mandate” to the outcome. This democratic component may be less critical for the Facebook Oversight Board’s judicial-style decisions, but is crucial for policy creation. That said, a body like the Oversight Board could be a complement to platform assemblies, acting as an independent agenda-setting body to identify issues to be brought to them. 