
      



  
    


      
    Guidance
  

  
  
    Competition: Behavioural Analytics Phase 2
  

  
  

  
    
  This Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA) competition is seeking proposals that can help UK Defence and Security to develop capability in ‘Behavioural Analytics’.

  



  
    
      
  
      From:
      
          Defence and Security Accelerator

      
      Published
      11 June 2020
  

    
    
    
  










  
    
      

      
          
    Documents


      

    
        
  
      
  
  
    Competition Document: Behavioural Analytics Phase 2
    
        HTML
    


  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Terms: Behavioural Analytics Phase 2
    
        MS Word Document, 91KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  

  
      
  
  
    ISC Schedules: Behavioural Analytics Phase 2
    
        MS Word Document, 50.3KB
    


      
        This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.
        
  
    
      Request an accessible format.
    
  
  
    
          If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a
version of this document in a more accessible format, please email accelerator@dstl.gov.uk.
Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.


  
      
  



  


        
          Details


          

    
            
DASA is looking for scientific and technological solutions that can provide context-specific insights into the ‘how’ and ‘why’ of individual, group and population behaviour, enabling predictions about how they are likely to act in the future. At this stage we are looking for theoretical and technological developments, beyond proof of concept, to result in working models, tools and techniques.

This is the second phase of funding for this competition. Phase 1 launched in October 2018 and funded 29 projects. It is not compulsory to have been involved in Phase 1 to apply.

£2M is available to fund multiple projects in Phase 2, which closes for submission at midday (BST) on Thursday 13 August 2020.



        
      

      
    Published 11 June 2020



      
    
  
  

  


    
  

      
        Related content
      




      

    Collection

  


        Defence and Security Accelerator themed competitions

  


  



    


  Brexit
  
    Check what you need to do









  
    
        
  
    
  





      

    Explore the topic

  


        Government
        Business and industry

  


  

  


    
  


    